Fault zone architecture and permeability structure
Jonathan Saul Caine
Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112
James P. Evans
Department of Geology, Utah State University, Logan, Utah 84322-4505
Craig B. Forster
Earth Sciences and Resources Institute, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112
ABSTRACT
Fault zone architecture and related permeability structures form primary controls on
ﬂuid ﬂow in upper-crustal, brittle fault zones. We develop qualitative and quantitative
schemes for evaluating fault-related permeability structures by using results of ﬁeld in-
vestigations, laboratory permeability measurements, and numerical models of ﬂow within
and near fault zones. The qualitative scheme compares the percentage of the total fault zone
width composed of fault core materials (e.g., anastomosing slip surfaces, clay-rich gouge,
cataclasite, and fault breccias) to the percentage of subsidiary damage zone structures (e.g.,
kinematically related fracture sets, small faults, and veins). A more quantitative scheme is
developed to deﬁne a set of indices that characterize fault zone architecture and spatial
variability. The fault core and damage zone are distinct structural and hydrogeologic units
that reﬂect the material properties and deformation conditions within a fault zone.
Whether a fault zone will act as a conduit, barrier, or combined conduit-barrier system is
controlled by the relative percentage of fault core and damage zone structures and the
inherent variability in grain scale and fracture permeability. This paper outlines a frame-
work for understanding, comparing, and correlating the ﬂuid ﬂow properties of fault zones
in various geologic settings.
INTRODUCTION
Brittle fault zones are lithologically het-
erogeneous and structurally anisotropic dis-
continuities in the upper crust. They may act
as conduits, barriers, or combined conduit-
barrier systems that enhance or impede ﬂuid
ﬂow (Randolph and Johnson, 1989; Smith et
al., 1990; Scholz, 1990; Caine et al., 1993;
Forster et al., 1994; Antonellini and Aydin,
1994; Newman and Mitra, 1994; Goddard
and Evans, 1995). Fault zones are composed
of distinct components: a fault core where
most of the displacement is accommodated
and an associated damage zone that is me-
chanically related to the growth of the fault
zone (Sibson, 1977; Chester and Logan,
1986; Davison and Wang, 1988; Forster and
Evans, 1991; Byerlee, 1993; Scholz and
Anders, 1994). The amount and distribution
of each component control ﬂuid ﬂow within
and near the fault zone.
Insufﬁcient data, particularly ﬁeld-based
data, are available to adequately character-
ize and compare architecture, permeability
structure, ﬂuid ﬂow, and mechanical prop-
erties of fault zones found in different geo-
logic environments. Current demands to
prove the long-term integrity of waste-dis-
posal facilities, produce hydrocarbons from
reservoirs
compartmentalized
by
fault
zones, extract mineral deposits, and esti-
mate earthquake risk require incorporating
detailed, ﬁeld-based representations of the
physical properties of fault zones in predic-
tive ﬂuid ﬂow simulators. Development of
valid ﬂow models is hindered by our inability
to measure in situ fault zone properties in a
way that adequately characterizes the spatial
and temporal variations in permeability, po-
rosity, and storativity.
In this paper, we compile data, terminol-
ogy, and conceptual models in order to con-
solidate our knowledge of fault-related per-
meability structures. We outline a fault zone
model and a set of indices that serve as a
guide in evaluating the physical properties
of fault zones. This model can be used as a
framework for determining spatial variabil-
ity in fault zone architecture from ﬁeld data
and for incorporating physically based geo-
logic information in mathematical models of
ﬂuid ﬂow in faulted rocks. We ﬁrst deﬁne
the major components of a fault zone and
then set forth both qualitative and quanti-
tative schemes for fault-related permeability
structures. The schemes are based on a syn-
opsis of our research and the work of other
authors (Sibson, 1981; Oliver, 1986; Chester
and Logan, 1986; Parry and Bruhn, 1986;
Scholz, 1987; Scholz and Anders, 1994;
Parry et al., 1988; Bruhn et al., 1990; Smith
et al., 1990; Forster and Evans, 1991; Moore
and Vrolijk, 1992; Caine et al., 1993; New-
man and Mitra, 1994; Goddard and Evans,
1995).
FAULT ZONE DEFINITION
The primary components of upper-crustal
fault zones are fault core, damage zone, and
protolith (shown in the conceptual model of
Fig. 1). No scalar relationship is implied be-
tween the components, nor must all of the
components be present in any given fault
zone. Note that the ﬂuid ﬂow properties of
a fault zone may change, thus the diagram
represents only a single point in time. For
example, the core may act as a conduit dur-
ing deformation and as a barrier when open
pore space is ﬁlled by mineral precipitation
following deformation. Thus, it is important
to specify the stage of fault evolution when
forming a conceptual model for a particular
fault zone.
We deﬁne a fault core as the structural,
lithologic, and morphologic portion of a
fault zone where most of the displacement is
Figure 1. Conceptual model of fault zone with protolith removed (after Chester and Logan, 1986;
Smith et al., 1990). Ellipse represents relative magnitude and orientation of the bulk two-
dimensional permeability (k) tensor that might be associated with each distinct architectural
component of fault zone.
Data Repository item 9659 contains additional material related to this article.
Geology; November 1996; v. 24; no. 11; p. 1025–1028; 3 ﬁgures; 1 table.
1025

accommodated (Fig. 1). Fault cores may in-
clude single slip surfaces (Caine et al., 1991),
unconsolidated
clay-rich
gouge
zones
(Anderson et al., 1983), brecciated and geo-
chemically altered zones (Sibson, 1977), or
highly indurated, cataclasite zones (Chester
and Logan, 1986). Our ﬁeld-based observa-
tions suggest that thickness variations, both
down dip and along strike, combined with a
distinctive internal structure and composi-
tion, play an important role in controlling
the ﬂuid ﬂow properties of fault zone cores.
Grain-size reduction and/or mineral precip-
itation generally yield fault cores with lower
porosity and permeability than the adjacent
protolith (e.g., Chester and Logan, 1986;
Antonellini and Aydin, 1994; Goddard and
Evans, 1995). Permeability reduction leads
to fault cores that act as barriers to ﬂuid ﬂow
(see Table 1 below).
A damage zone is the network of subsid-
iary structures that bound the fault core and
may enhance fault zone permeability rela-
tive to the core and the undeformed proto-
lith (Fig. 1; Chester and Logan, 1986; Smith
et al., 1990; Andersson et al., 1991; Scholz
and Anders, 1994; Goddard and Evans,
1995). Fault-related subsidiary structures in
damage zones include small faults, veins,
fractures, cleavage, and folds that cause het-
erogeneity and anisotropy in the permeabil-
ity structure and elastic properties of the
fault zone (Bruhn et al., 1994). Wide dam-
age zones may indicate multiple episodes of
slip and the overprinting of successive de-
formation events.
The fault core and damaged zones shown
in Figure 1 are surrounded by relatively un-
deformed protolith. This is the country rock
where fault-related permeability structures
are absent, and both ﬂuid ﬂow and elastic
properties of the rock reﬂect those of the
unfaulted host rock. Fault zone architecture
may ultimately reﬂect the degree to which
the processes of strain localization vs. strain
distribution compete as the fault zone cuts
different rock types in the protolith.
The geometry and magnitude of perme-
ability contrasts between the fault core and
damage zone are primary controls on the
barrier-conduit
systematics
of
the
fault
zone. Fracture density in the fault core is
usually signiﬁcantly less than in the damage
zone (Andersson et al., 1991; Chester et al.,
1993). Thus, the permeability of the fault
core may be dominated by the grain-scale
permeability of the fault rocks, whereas the
damage zone permeability is dominated by
the hydraulic properties of the fracture
network.
CONCEPTUAL SCHEME FOR
FAULT-RELATED FLUID FLOW
A range of fault zone architectures are
observed in outcrop (Fig. 2). Each of the
four end-member architectural styles is as-
sociated with a characteristic permeability
structure (Chester and Logan, 1986; Bruhn
et al., 1990; Forster and Evans, 1991; Moore
and Vrolijk, 1992; Newman and Mitra,
1994). These include localized conduits, dis-
tributed conduits, localized barriers, and
combined conduit-barriers (Table 1).
NUMERICAL MEASURES OF FAULT
ZONE ARCHITECTURE AND
PERMEABILITY STRUCTURE
Fault zone architecture and permeability
structure are characterized by using three
numerical indices derived from our concep-
tual model: Fa, Fm, and Fs.
Fa 5
damage zone width
total fault zone width
5
damage zone width
core width 1 damage zone width .
Fm 5 mean of Fa values for
a single fault zone.
Fs 5 ~Fa)max 2 ~Fa)min.
Fa is a fault zone architectural index. Values
of Fa range from 0 to 1 and provide a mea-
sure of the relative width of the fault core
and damage zone at a speciﬁed location
(Fig. 3A). When Fa is 0, ideally the damage
zone is absent, and the lower permeability of
the fault core causes the fault zone to act as
a barrier to ﬂow. When Fa is 1, ideally the
fault core is absent, and the presence of a
higher permeability damage zone causes the
fault zone to act as a conduit for ﬂow. Fm is
the mean value of Fa obtained for a set of
fault zone measurements (Fig. 3A). Fm is
indicative of the overall architecture and
permeability structure of a fault zone and
can be measured along speciﬁc transects
(e.g., along the dip or strike of the fault
zone). Fs is a spatial variability index that
represents the spread in values of Fa ob-
tained within a speciﬁc fault zone (Fig. 3A).
This measure of the spread is, perhaps, a
more physically based measure than using
the standard deviation.
Plotting values of Fa against total fault
zone width yields insight regarding the me-
chanics of faulting, the response of protolith
rock types to deformation, and the resulting
architecture
and
permeability
structure
within a single fault zone (Fig. 3A) or within
a group of fault zones (Fig. 3B).1 The hor-
izontal axis of the plot ranges between two
end-member architectures and permeability
structures. When Fa 5 0, the architecture of
the fault zone may be dominated by strain
localized deformation resulting in a barrier-
type permeability structure (Fig. 3). When
Fa 5 1, the fault zone may reﬂect distributed
strain resulting in a conduit-type permeabil-
ity structure (Fig. 3). Intermediate values of
Fa indicate combined strain localization and
distributed deformation that yield a barrier-
conduit permeability structure (Fig. 3).
Figure 3A is an example plot of fault zone
architecture and permeability structure ob-
tained for a single fault (fault 6) located in
upper Paleozoic clastic rocks at Traill Ø,
East Greenland. Fault 6 is an oblique-slip
normal fault on which there has been 85 m
of displacement. Excellent exposures of the
fault core, damage zone, and protolith were
mapped at 11 localities along a 400 m ver-
tical traverse. Numbers associated with each
point plotted in Figure 3A indicate the ele-
vation at which the data were collected.
Figure 3A shows possible correlations be-
tween protolith rock type, the protolith’s
mechanical response to deformation, and
the resulting permeability structure of fault
6. The three points clustered in the lower
right-hand corner of Figure 3A are from a
part of fault 6 where the protolith is domi-
1GSA Data Repository item 9659, raw fault-
zone data, is available from Documents Secre-
tary, GSA, P.O. Box 9140, Boulder, CO 80301.
E-mail: editing@geosociety.org.
Figure 2. Conceptual scheme for fault-related ﬂuid ﬂow.
1026
GEOLOGY, November 1996

nated by shale and the fault core lithology is
dominated by clay-rich gouge. The damage
zone structures include quartz and calcite
veins, open fractures, and small faults. Out-
crop observations suggest that where the
fault zone cuts shale-rich protolith there has
been a higher degree of strain localization
than where it cuts sandstone-rich protolith.
This is illustrated by the clustering of points
in contrast to the more diffusely distributed
points. The high clay content in the fault
core in this part of the fault, combined with
veins and open fractures in the damage
zone, would suggest that the fault zone acted
as a syn- and postdeformational conduit-
barrier permeability structure.
The relatively wide spread of the diffusely
distributed points corresponds to the in-
crease of quartz-rich sandstone in the pro-
tolith. At these locations the fault core li-
thology becomes dominated by siliciﬁed
breccias. The fault zone architecture and
permeability structure in this region indi-
cates that the fault zone would have been a
syndeformational ﬂow conduit and a post-
deformational conduit-barrier ﬂuid ﬂow sys-
tem, with ﬂow being preferentially oriented
parallel to the fault zone.
For fault 6, Fm 5 0.79 (Fig. 3A). This re-
sult indicates that the overall architecture is
a conduit-barrier ﬂuid ﬂow system, which
agrees with outcrop observations. Both si-
liciﬁed breccia and clay-rich gouge in the
core would act as barriers to ﬂow normal to
the fault zone, and open fractures in the
damage zone would act as a conduit for ﬂow
parallel to the fault zone. The overall spread
in values of Fa obtained for fault 6 yields an
Fs value of 0.33. This relatively small value
of Fs suggests that fault 6 has a relatively
uniform architecture, which is observed in
the ﬁeld.
Fault zone architecture and permeability
structure plots can also be used with three-
dimensional data from extensive surface ex-
posures and drill cores. Multiple fault zones
from a single area or many different areas
can be plotted to compare lithology, defor-
mation structures, and ﬂuid ﬂow properties
(Fig. 3B). Figure 3B shows values of Fm
plotted for several different fault zones
where we have obtained data from our ﬁeld
work or from the literature. The data shown
in Figure 3B suggest that fault zones that are
damage zone dominated (e.g., Fm values
greater than 0.5) tend to form in clastic
rocks and span a large range of displace-
ments. Plotting architectural data and de-
termining Fm from many diverse fault zones
will enable correlations to be made between
the factors that control fault zone architec-
ture (e.g., lithology, displacement, and de-
gree of strain localization) and subsequent
ﬂuid ﬂow properties (Fig. 3B). By using this
approach, a better understanding of the
“rules” that govern the development of fault
zone architecture and permeability struc-
ture may be gained, and predictive estimates
of the ﬂuid ﬂow properties of similar fault
zones might be made where direct mea-
surements are not possible.
DISCUSSION: FACTORS THAT
CONTROL FAULT ZONE
HYDROGEOLOGY
Intrinsic controls (i.e., rock types vs. ex-
trinsic controls such as stress state) on fault
zone permeability, porosity, and storativity
include lithology, fault displacement, three-
dimensional fault zone geometry, deforma-
tion conditions, types of subsidiary struc-
tures, ﬂuid-rock interactions, and the spatial
and temporal variability of these parame-
ters. Little work using ﬁeld-based and ex-
perimental methods has been done to gain
insight into these controls. A major difﬁculty
in assessing fault zone permeability data
comes from the lack of consistent documen-
tation of the morphological position (i.e.,
core, damage zone, or protolith) from which
fault zone samples and data are collected
(Evans, 1990). Fully characterizing the ﬂuid
ﬂow properties of fault zones involves ob-
taining permeability data for each fault zone
component and clearly documenting the
Figure 3. Fault zone architec-
ture and permeability structure
plots. A: Data obtained from
fault 6, Traill Ø, East Greenland
(dots represent quartz-rich
lithologies; squares represent
clay-rich lithologies). B: Data
from faults mapped in different
geologic environments.
GEOLOGY, November 1996
1027

component of the fault zone from which
samples and related data are collected.
Field observations of unfractured fault
core materials suggest that they are domi-
nated by grain-scale permeability. Labora-
tory-determined permeabilities for natural
fault core materials show a range of varia-
tion of approximately 10 orders of magni-
tude (10212 to 10222 m2 from Smith et al.,
1990). These data suggest that the perme-
ability of fault core materials depends, in
part, on lithology and the degree to which
that lithology has been chemically altered.
Rocks with the lowest phyllosilicate content
tend to have the highest permeability. If
there is a direct correlation between proto-
lith rock type and the types of fault core
materials that develop in a given deforma-
tion environment, then a predictive link may
be made with the resulting conduit-barrier
systematics.
Although fault zone core materials often
have low matrix permeability, they may not
always act as a barrier to ﬂow, particularly
during deformation. For example, work on
the Dixie Valley fault zone shows that the
fault core acted as a short-lived, syndefor-
mational, ﬂuid ﬂow conduit that then rap-
idly sealed to form a barrier to ﬂow. This
history is also indicated from work on fault
6, Traill Ø, East Greenland. In contrast,
damage zones tend to be conduits compared
with both the fault core and the often lower
or “background” permeability of the protolith.
In spite of the dearth of laboratory-deter-
mined grain-scale permeability values from
samples of damage zone materials, our ﬁeld
observations suggest that damage zone per-
meability is fracture dominated. The juxta-
position of highly fractured damage zone
materials with undeformed protolith and
generally unfractured fault core materials
forms major permeability contrasts within a
fault zone. Preliminary estimates of damage
zone fracture permeability, using the frac-
ture-permeability estimation methods of
Oda et al. (1987) and Bruhn (1993), in both
the Dixie Valley fault zone and fault 6, are
two to three orders of magnitude greater
than the permeability of fractured protolith
and four to six orders of magnitude greater
than the fault core grain-scale permeabili-
ties. The magnitude and spatial variability of
this permeability contrast may be the pri-
mary control on fault zone barrier-conduit
systematics.
Additional controls on fault zone archi-
tecture and permeability structure may in-
clude deformation conditions and the chem-
istry of fault zone ﬂuids. Understanding the
combined impact of mechanical and chem-
ical changes in each of the three fault zone
components on overall architecture and per-
meability structure is crucial to a better un-
derstanding of heterogeneity and anisotropy
in fault zones. Field-based fault zone archi-
tectural data can then be evaluated in the
context of permeability structure and for-
mative deformation processes by using the
quantitative scheme and architectural indices.
CONCLUSIONS
Fluid ﬂow in upper-crustal, brittle fault
zones depends on fault zone architecture
and permeability structure. We represent
these aspects of fault zone structure and hy-
drogeology in the qualitative and quantita-
tive schemes presented in this paper. The
schemes are based on a three-component
fault zone model that includes a fault core,
damage zone, and protolith. This concep-
tual model is used to delineate the distinct
structural and hydrogeologic regimes of a
fault zone. A conceptual scheme with four
end members is used to identify the range of
possible and observed conﬁgurations of the
three fault zone components. A second,
more quantitative scheme, represents vari-
ations in fault zone structure by using archi-
tectural indices. Adopting these schemes
provides a consistent framework for evalu-
ating how the permeability structure of fault
zones controls ﬂuid ﬂow in diverse struc-
tural regimes.
There is a clear need to continue ﬁeld-
based characterization and sample collec-
tion to determine the factors that control
ﬂuid ﬂow in fault zones. This work should be
done in each fault zone component, on a
variety of fault zone types developed within
different lithologies over a broad range of
scales. Once reﬁned quantitative data are
added to the scheme, new axes may be
added. These might include time or lithol-
ogy axes that would make the schemes more
comprehensive and possibly provide a pre-
dictive tool for better understanding fault
zone architecture and permeability struc-
ture. The role of ﬂuids in faulting processes,
as well as the growing concerns of fault-
related utilization of ground-water, hydro-
carbon, mineral, and geothermal resources,
makes understanding and characterizing
fault zone architecture and permeability
structure critical at various times through-
out the evolution of a fault zone.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Arild Andresen of the University of Oslo for support
of ﬁeld work in East Greenland, Exxon Production Research Com-
pany for support of ﬁeld and laboratory work in east Greenland,
U.S. Geological Survey National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program grant 1434-93-G-2280 (to Forster, R. L. Bruhn, and J.
Fredrich) for support of work on the Dixie Valley fault zone, and
National Science Foundation grant 92-05774 and U.S. Geological
Survey National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program grant
1434-94-G-2468 (to Evans).
REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, L. J., Osborne, R. H., and Palmer, D. F., 1983, Cata-
clastic rocks of the San Gabriel fault—An expression of
deformation at deeper crustal levels in the San Andreas
fault zones: Tectonophysics, v. 98, p. 209–251.
Andersson, J. E., Ekman, L., Nordqvist, R., and Winberg, A., 1991,
Hydraulic testing and modeling of a low-angle fracture zone
at Finnsjon, Sweden: Journal of Hydrology, v. 126, p. 45–77.
Antonellini, M., and Aydin, A., 1994, Effect of faulting on ﬂuid
ﬂow in porous sandstones: Petrophysicial properties: Amer-
ican Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, v. 78,
p. 355–377.
Bruhn, R. L., 1993, Crack 2D: An unpublished MatLab computer
program for deriving permeability tensors in two dimensions
using the methods of Oda, 1986 and Oda et al., 1987: Uni-
versity of Utah, Department of Geology and Geophysics,
Structural Geology Lab.
Bruhn, R. L., Yonkee, W. E., and Parry, W. T., 1990, Structural
and ﬂuid-chemical properties of seismogenic normal faults:
Tectonophysics, v. 175, p. 139–157.
Bruhn, R. L., Parry, W. T., Yonkee, W. A., and Thompson, T.,
1994, Fracturing and hydrothermal alteration in normal
fault zones: PAGEOPH, v. 142, p. 609–644.
Byerlee, J., 1993, Model for episodic ﬂow of high-pressure water
in fault zones before earthquakes: Geology, v. 21, p. 303–306.
Caine, J. S., Coates, D. R., Timoffeef, N. P., and Davis, W. D.,
1991, Hydrogeology of the Northern Shawangunk Moun-
tains: New York State Geological Survey Open-File Re-
port 1g806, 72 p. and maps.
Caine, J. S., Forster, C. B., and Evans, J. P., 1993, A classiﬁcation
scheme for permeability structures in fault zones: Eos
(Transactions, American Geophysical Union), v. 74, p. 677.
Chester, F. M., and Logan, J. M., 1986, Composite planar fabric of
gouge from the Punchbowl fault, California: Journal of
Structural Geology, v. 9, p. 621–634.
Chester, F. M., Evans, J. P., and Biegel, R. L., 1993, Internal
structure and weakening mechanisms of the San Andreas
fault: Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 98, p. 771–786.
Davison, C. C., and Wang, C. Y., 1988, Hydrogeologic character-
istics of major fracture zones in a large granite batholith of
the Canadian shield: Proceedings, 4th Canadian-American
Conference on Hydrogeology, Banff, Canada, June 1988,
n.p.
Evans, J. P., 1990, Textures and deformation mechanisms and the
role of ﬂuids in cataclastically deformed granitic rocks, in
Knipe, R. J., and Rutter, E., eds., Deformation mechanisms,
rheology, and tectonics: Geological Society of London Spe-
cial Publication 54, p. 29–39.
Forster, C. B., and Evans, J. P., 1991, Hydrogeology of thrust faults
and crystalline thrust sheets: Results of combined ﬁeld and
modeling studies: Geophysical Research Letters, v. 18,
p. 979–982.
Forster, C. B., Goddard, J. V., and Evans, J. P., 1994, Permeability
structure of a thrust fault, in The mechanical involvement of
ﬂuids in faulting: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Re-
port 94-228, p. 216–223.
Goddard, J. V., and Evans, J. P., 1995, Chemical changes and
ﬂuid-rock interaction in faults of crystalline thrust sheets,
northwestern Wyoming, U.S.A.: Journal of Structural Geo-
logy, v. 17, p. 533–547.
Moore, J. C., and Vrolijk, P., 1992, Fluids in accretionary prisms:
Reviews of Geophysics, v. 30, p. 113–135.
Newman, J., and Mitra, G., 1994, Fluid-inﬂuenced deformation
and recrystallization of dolomite at low temperatures along
a natural fault zone, Mountain City window, Tennessee: Geo-
logical Society of America Bulletin, v. 106, p. 1267–1280.
Oda, M., Hatsuyama, Y., and Ohnishi, Y., 1987, Numerical ex-
periments on permeability tensor and its application to
jointed granite at Stripa mine, Sweden: Journal of Geo-
physical Research, v. 92, p. 8037–8048.
Oliver, J., 1986, Fluids expelled tectonically from orogenic belts:
Their role in hydrocarbon migration and other geologic phe-
nomena: Geology, v. 14, p. 99–102.
Parry, W. T., and Bruhn, R. L., 1986, Pore ﬂuid and seismogenic
characteristics of fault rock at depth on the Wasatch fault,
Utah: Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 91, p. 730–744.
Parry, W. T., Wilson, P. N., and Bruhn, R. L., 1988, Pore-ﬂuid
chemistry and chemical reactions on the Wasatch normal
fault, Utah: Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, v. 52,
p. 2053–2063.
Randolph, L., and Johnson, B., 1989, Inﬂuence of faults of mod-
erate displacement on groundwater ﬂow in the Hickory
sandstone aquifer in central Texas: Geological Society of
America Abstracts with Programs, v. 21, p. 242.
Scholz, C. H., 1987, Wear and gouge formation in brittle faulting:
Geology, v. 15, p. 493–495.
Scholz, C. H., 1990, The mechanics of earthquakes and faulting:
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 439 p.
Scholz, C. H., and Anders, M. H., 1994, The permeability of faults,
in The mechanical involvement of ﬂuids in faulting: U.S.
Geological Survey Open-File Report 94-228, p. 247–253.
Sibson, R. H., 1977, Fault rocks and fault mechanisms: Geological
Society of London Journal, v. 133, p. 191–231.
Sibson, R. H., 1981, Fluid ﬂow accompanying faulting: Field evi-
dence and models, in Simpson, D. W., and Richards, P. G.,
eds., Earthquake prediction—An international review:
American Geophysical Union Monograph, Maurice Ewing
Series, v. 4, p. 593–603.
Smith, L., Forster, C. B., and Evans, J. P., 1990, Interaction of fault
zones, ﬂuid ﬂow, and heat transfer at the basin scale, in
Hydrogeology of permeability environments: International
Association of Hydrogeologists, v. 2, p. 41–67.
Manuscript received March 8, 1996
Revised manuscript received July 10, 1996
Manuscript accepted July 29, 1996
1028
GEOLOGY, November 1996
Printed in U.S.A.
