Catalog of geothermal play types based on geologic controls
Inga S. Moeck n
Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2E3
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 11 July 2013
Received in revised form
21 April 2014
Accepted 10 May 2014
Available online 12 June 2014
Keywords:
Geothermal systems
Classiﬁcation scheme
Convection dominated geothermal plays
Conduction dominated geothermal plays
Geological controls
a b s t r a c t
The key element in the characterization, assessment and development of geothermal energy systems is
the resource type. Throughout the past 30 years many resource type schemes and deﬁnitions were
published, based on temperature and thermodynamic properties. An alternative possibility to cataloging
geothermal energy systems is by their geologic characteristics, referred to as geothermal plays. Applied
to worldwide case studies, a new catalog is developed based on the effects of geological controls and
structural plate tectonic positions on thermal regime and heat ﬂow, hydrogeologic regime, ﬂuid
dynamics, ﬂuid chemistry, faults and fractures, stress regime, and lithological sequence. Understanding
geologic controls, especially of geothermal plays without surface expression, allows the comparison with
hydrocarbon reservoirs through their ratio of porosity and permeability. This analog has implications on
site-speciﬁc, ﬁrst class exploration strategies and reservoir improvement through technologies speciﬁ-
cally suitable for unconventional sustainable energy reservoirs. This article aims to introduce geothermal
plays to a wide geoscientiﬁc community and to initiate a geologically based cataloging of geothermal
resources. With this new catalog of geothermal plays, it will be ultimately possible to transfer lessons
learned not only within one speciﬁc catalog type, but also technology from geothermal plays to
unconventional hydrocarbon plays and vice versa.
& 2014 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).
Contents
1.
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 867
2.
Geologic perspective on geothermal play systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 869
3.
Geothermal plays in relation to plate tectonic setting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 869
4.
Geologic controls on geothermal plays. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 871
4.1.
Convection-dominated geothermal plays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 871
4.1.1.
Magmatic geothermal plays–volcanic ﬁeld and plutonic type. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 871
4.1.2.
Non-magmatic geothermal plays – extensional domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 873
4.2.
Conduction dominated geothermal plays. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 874
4.2.1.
Igneous geothermal plays– basement type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 875
4.2.2.
Non-magmatic geothermal plays – intracratonic basins and orogenic belts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 875
5.
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 878
6.
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 879
Acknowledgments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 880
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 880
1. Introduction
Geothermal energy provides commercial base-load electricity
from conventional hydrothermal resources for more than 100 years,
with a global installed electricity generation of 10,751 MWel [1]
and direct use of 50,583 MWth [2]. Whereas these prime geothermal
systems are limited to tectonically active areas or regions with active
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rser
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.05.032
1364-0321/& 2014 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).
Abbreviations:
MWel,
Megawatt
electric;
MWth,
Megawatt
thermal;
EGS,
Enhanced Geothermal Systems; MPa, Megapascal; HDR, Hot Dry Rock; GHG,
Greenhouse gas; CV, Convection dominated heat transfer regime; CD, Conduction
dominated heat transfer regime
n Tel.: þ1 7804923265; fax: þ1 7804922030.
E-mail address: moeck@ualberta.ca
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882

volcanism, the concept of Enhanced or Engineered Geothermal
Systems (EGS) has signiﬁcantly increased the world-wide geothermal
potential by technology reservoirs where the stored thermal energy
can be extracted from subsurface even in areas of low or moderate
heat ﬂow. Tester et al. [3] claim that EGS resources could technically
provide 100,000 MWel cost-competitive electric energy in the USA by
2050. However, more effort in research and development is needed
to realize this goal. Successful reservoir production from geothermal
systems depends mainly on the appropriate selection of exploration
methods. The decision for these appropriate exploration methods
might depend on the type of geothermal energy system foreseen for
heat and power production and necessitates a classiﬁcation system
for geothermal system types. A geothermal system is generally
classiﬁed by its geological, hydrogeological and heat transfer char-
acteristics, while a geothermal resource is formed by an economically
sufﬁcient amount of heat concentration in drillable depth of Earth's
crust [4]. The term sufﬁcient may dependent on technology devel-
opment resulting in modern viable geothermal reserves that were
not economic in the past. When it comes to geothermal prospects,
resources and reserves, it is obvious that clear terms and deﬁnitions
are required to provide reliable and comparable reserve estimation
analogous to the classiﬁcation schemes developed for petroleum
resources. According to the Petroleum Resources Management Sys-
tem [5], reserves are classiﬁed as commercially recoverable resources
and contingent resources are less certain because of some commer-
cial or technical hurdle resulting in a lower conﬁdence level for
eventual production. The lowest level in this classiﬁcation scheme is
represented by prospective resources, which are estimated but
undiscovered accumulation of potentially recoverable heat (i.e. prior
to drilling). Unrecoverable resources are classiﬁed as not being
commercially producible at the present point in time. While one
portion the unrecoverables may become recoverable in the future
with changing commercial and evolving technological circumstances,
another portion may never be recovered due to physical or chemical
constraints in the reservoir [5]. From this classiﬁcation perspective,
the lowest unit in a bottom up approach is the geologically based so-
called “play type”, which leads to prospects and ultimately to
reserves. A play type in petroleum geology represents a particular
stratigraphic or structural geological setting, deﬁned by source rock,
reservoir rock and trap [6]. Translated to geothermal systems, a play
type might be deﬁned by the heat source, the geological controls on
the heat migration pathway, heat/ﬂuid storage capacity and the
potential for economic recovery of the heat. Ultimately the geological
habitat does not only control the play type but also the decision for
applied heat recovery technology.
The new interest in geothermal energy resources is tied to the
question of economic risks and the production potential of
individual geothermal resource types. Quantifying the chance of
development and ﬁeld production involves feasibility studies and
utilization concepts for the economic development of speciﬁc
geothermal systems. From this perspective, it is important to note
that a geothermal resource is part of a geologic system where
geologic factors such as lithology, faults, fractures, stress ﬁeld,
diagenesis, rock mechanics, ﬂuid chemistry and geochemistry
control key parameters, such as high porosity and high perme-
ability domains, ﬂuid ﬂow, lateral and vertical temperature dis-
tribution and overall reservoir behavior during injection and
production. A site speciﬁc appropriate ﬁeld development should
therefore be based on a profound understanding of the geologic
controls of a geothermal play involving a suite of modern site
speciﬁc exploration techniques. A clear and widely understandable
new catalog of geothermal plays is required to fulﬁll the aims of
exploration in reducing the risk of non-productive wells and
guiding best choice reservoir technology to ultimately produce
thermal energy on an economically sustainable level. The need for
a new catalog may also emerge for two major reasons: (I) The recent
development in Enhanced Geothermal System (EGS) technologies
produces tangible pilot projects for heat and power generation from
low-enthalpy resources, thereby extending the worldwide geother-
mal potential, and (II) the growing political-social request for renew-
able energy to reduce climate gas emission.
Throughout the past 30 years many catalog schemes and
deﬁnitions for geothermal resources have been published, mainly
based on temperature and thermodynamic properties. Tempera-
ture has been the essential measure of the quality of the resource,
and geothermal play systems have been divided into three
different temperature (or enthalpy) play types: low-temperature,
moderate-temperature and high-temperature [7–13]. There are,
however, no uniform temperature ranges for these types (Table 1).
Lee [14] pointed out that temperature and enthalpy alone are
inconsistent and insufﬁcient to catalog geothermal plays and
suggests a catalog scheme by the speciﬁc exergy of a geothermal
ﬂuid as a measure of its ability to do a work. The term exergy is
used in thermodynamics to deﬁne the amount of energy that is
available to be used during a process that brings the system into
equilibrium [15]. Lee [14] developed a speciﬁc exergy index as the
ratio of the speciﬁc exergy of a given geothermal play to the
speciﬁc exergy in the saturated steam at a pressure of 9 MPa. Lee's
geothermal play catalog has some advantages, as it directly relates
to relevant properties of the produced thermal ﬂuid at the well-
head. However, it does not consider geological–hydrogeological
aspects such as geological setting, controls on ﬂuid ﬂow, ﬂuid
chemistry and possible mineral precipitation in reservoir rock or in
technical installations below and above the ground surface. All of
these factors can impair the energy production and overall economic
utilization of a geothermal resource. Moreover, Lee's [14] concept
requires access to both temperature and pressure estimates for actual
conditions at the wellhead; thus his catalog scheme can only be
applied after drilling the ﬁrst well. A geothermal play catalog and
assessment scheme should, however, also be applicable before
drilling for assessment and site speciﬁc ﬁeld development.
Williams et al. [16] point out that it is still a substantial
requirement that a resource assessment provides a logical and
consistent framework that is simpliﬁed enough to communicate
important aspects of geothermal energy potential to both non-
experts and the general public. One possible solution may be to
Table 1
Catalog scheme of geothermal resources by temperature according to different authors (compilation modiﬁed from Lee [14]).
Mufﬂer [8] (1C)
Hochstein [9] (1C)
Benderitter and Cormy [12] (1C)
Haenel et al. [10] (1C)
Low enthalpy
o90
o125
o100
o150
Moderate enthalpy
90–150
125–225
100–200
–
High enthalpy
4150
4225
4200
4150
Sanyal [13]
Non-electrical (1C)
Very low (1C)
Low (1C)
Moderate (1C)
High (1C)
Ultra high (1C)
o50–100
100–150
150–180
180–230
230–300
4300
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
868

avoid cataloging geothermal plays by temperature and simply
state the range of temperatures at the individual site.
Due to technological development, in particular in EGS tech-
nology, currently there are more geothermal systems that are
potentially economical than there were 30 years ago. Therefore, a
new cataloging scheme for geothermal play systems should
characterize geologic controls on geothermal resources, recogniz-
ing that future technological developments may alter quantitative
boundaries and deﬁnitions based on temperature. A catalog of
geothermal system plays should not be mistaken with a geother-
mal system classiﬁcation, which is preferably used for ﬁnancial
reporting
schemes
aiming
to
distinguish
between
different
degrees of certainty and project maturity (G. Beardsmore, 2013,
personal communication).
2. Geologic perspective on geothermal play systems
In contrast to the straightforward deﬁnition of hydrocarbon
play systems, which are clearly deﬁned by their source rock,
reservoir and trap, geothermal play systems are lacking such a
clear set of geological features. Instead, geothermal play systems
appear in diverse geologic environments and theoretically all over
the world. For geothermal resource utilization, important factors
are how much heat is stored at a drillable depth and if this heat is
producible at an economic rate for a speciﬁc project. Pioneering
work in describing and cataloging geothermal systems was done
by Manfred Hochstein in the late 1980s. After 30 years of devel-
opment in geothermal technology, however, it is time, to extend
Hochstein's catalog to incorporate EGS.
The American Geosciences Institute deﬁnes a geothermal
system generally as [17]:
“Any regionally localized geological settings where naturally
occurring portions of the earth's internal heat ﬂow are transported
close enough to the earth's surface by circulating steam or hot
water to be readily harnessed for use”.
Since this deﬁnition refers only to convective geothermal
resources, Williams et al. [16] broadened this deﬁnition to include
also conductive geothermal resources:
“A geothermal system is any localized geologic setting where
portions of the Earth's thermal energy may be extracted from a
circulating ﬂuid and transported to a point of use”.
This deﬁnition still excludes the concept of EGS, where the
geothermal play system conditions are enhanced from previous
non-economic to economic conditions. The key point for EGS is
that the ratio of the temperature to the ﬂow rate (or production
and injection rate) must be given for an economic use. Although
the quantitative meaning of economic might change through time,
the terms ﬂow rate, temperature and economics must be linked
for a modern geothermal system deﬁnition. The deﬁnition of
Williams et al. [16] should therefore be extended as follows:
“A geothermal system is any localized geologic setting where
portions of the Earth's thermal energy may be extracted from
natural or artiﬁcially induced circulating ﬂuids transported to a
point of use. Enhanced Geothermal Systems are portions of the
Earth crust where the ratio of ﬂow rate and ﬂuid temperature is
naturally too low for economic use, and therefore the ﬂow rate must
be increased to a sufﬁcient ﬂow rate/temperature ratio by enhancing
the natural permeability through technological solutions”.
In EGS the circulating ﬂuid can be the natural ﬂuid if a
hydrothermal system is hosted by a low permeability formation,
or it can be an artiﬁcial (i.e. injected) ﬂuid if the formation of the
geothermal system does not contain enough ﬂuid volume for heat
extraction (referred to as Hot Dry Rock or petrothermal system).
Referring to the revised deﬁnition of a geothermal system
above, an alternative possibility is classifying geothermal play
systems by their geologic setting. Recent attempts in categorizing
geothermal plays are the play fairway analyses of hydrothermal
systems in the United States, where the geographic extent of
favorable settings is deﬁned [18], or the play concept of rift zones
where repeating sets of prospects with common characteristics
deﬁne a play group [19]. From a structural geology perspective, a
catalog theme can be guided by the plate tectonic setting, for
example, whether the play system is related to convection or
conduction dominated heat transfer and if the geothermal play
system is magmatic or non-magmatic. Understanding and char-
acterizing the geologic controls on geothermal plays has been an
ongoing focus on different scales, from plate tectonics (e.g. [20,21])
to local tectonics/structural geology [22]. In fact, the geologic
setting has a fundamental inﬂuence on the potential temperature,
on the ﬂuid composition, the reservoir characteristics and whether
the geothermal play is a convective or conductive system.
In particular, a structural geological understanding helps to
better interpret geophysical data and to identify favorable settings
for drilling [23]. Essential parameters are the stress ﬁeld and
reservoir geomechanics, since the orientation of the current stress
ﬁeld has an impact on ﬂuid ﬂow along faults and ultimately on the
permeability anisotropy in fractured reservoirs [24]. The stress ﬁeld is
also crucial for EGS development because technology reservoirs,
particularly the technology of reservoir stimulation, aim to increase
the permeability by generating additional fractures [25]. Orientation
and growth of these artiﬁcial fractures are strongly controlled by the
stress ﬁeld and geomechanical rock properties, which need to be
understood prior to stimulation and deﬁning injection rates. A more
important factor than generating fractures through stimulation might
be keeping the induced fractures open during production and
subsequent formation pressure drop. The analysis of the fault
reactivation potential by the slip and dilation tendency technique
helps in risk assessment during injection in general, which also
includes re-injection [26]. A quantitative structural geology evalua-
tion involving 3D structural geological modeling, stress ﬁeld analysis
and fault stress modeling is therefore a fundamental part in
geothermal ﬁeld development from exploration to drilling to reser-
voir engineering [27].
This work will review these aspects along with a newly
developed catalog scheme based on the author's work experience
in different geologic-geothermal settings. This catalog involves
both convective and conductive dominated geothermal plays.
Special emphasis is given to geothermal exploration that provides
site-speciﬁc guidelines for geothermal systems, especially EGS.
3. Geothermal plays in relation to plate tectonic setting
Plate tectonic settings have a fundamental inﬂuence on the
characteristics of a geothermal play. The thermal regime and heat
ﬂow, hydrogeologic regime, ﬂuid dynamics, ﬂuid chemistry, faults
and fractures, stress regime and lithological sequence are all
controlled by the plate tectonic framework and are critical for
understanding the geothermal play system. The thermal state of
the crust at active plate boundaries is distinct from that in other
large-scale geological provinces, such as tectonically quiescent
settings (e.g. cratons), major fault zones (active or inactive), or
deep, sedimentary basins (intracontinental or in front of orogenic
zones).
In general, geothermal plays are dominated either by a con-
vection or conduction heat transfer regime. Convection-dominated
geothermal plays – often referred to as viable or active geothermal
play systems due to their ﬂuid dynamics [28] – host high enthalpy
resources and occur at plate tectonic margins, or settings of active
tectonism or volcanism (Fig. 1). Convection of thermal ﬂuids
induced by a heat source or elevated heat ﬂow transports heat
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
869

from deeper levels to the surface. Structural controls have a major
effect on ﬂuid ﬂow pathways in convection-dominated systems.
In high temperature play systems, ﬂuid ﬂow velocities are faster
than in low temperature resources [29]. Several factors and
processes inﬂuence convection within a geothermal play. Besides
a high temperature gradient, high permeability (41014 m2;
10 mD) is necessary to allow signiﬁcant convection, whereas in
low permeability layers (o1015 m2; 1 mD) only minor or no
convection occurs [9]. Generally, a high geothermal gradient,
natural ﬂuid ﬂow and ﬂuid dynamics characterize convection-
dominated geothermal plays.
In contrast, conduction-dominated geothermal plays host low
to medium enthalpy resources, which can also be called passive
geothermal play systems due to the absence of fast convective
ﬂow of ﬂuids and less short-term ﬂuid dynamics. These systems
are located predominately at passive tectonic plate settings where
no signiﬁcant recent tectonism or volcanism occurs. Here, the
geothermal gradient is average, thus this type of geothermal play
is located at greater depth than convection-dominated geothermal
systems. Conduction-dominated geothermal plays in low perme-
ability domains such as tight sandstones, carbonates or crystalline
rock require EGS technology to be utilized on an economic level.
Faults can still play an important role in these systems as a ﬂuid
conduit or barrier during production and may induce compart-
mentalization of the system into separate fault blocks. Lithofacies,
diagenesis, dissolution processes including karstiﬁcation and frac-
tures play a major role for reservoir quality evaluation comparable
to oil and gas plays.
An important factor in understanding the occurrence of con-
vection and conduction-dominated play systems is distinguishing
between igneous and non-magmatic geothermal plays. These
terms refer to the heat source and tectonic activity. Igneous play
systems can induce both conduction and convection-dominated
geothermal plays. The difference is that conduction-dominated
systems in or close to igneous rocks are related to high radiogenic
heat production (typically high heat producing element rich
granites), but no active volcanism and minor or no active tecton-
ism occurs. Alternatively, convection-dominated magmatic plays
require a magma chamber as the heat source in volcanic and
tectonically active areas. In conduction-dominated igneous plays,
large volumes of natural ﬂuids are absent. These “dry” systems
require EGS technology for hydraulic fracturing and injection
induced circulation of ﬂuids to transfer heat from depth to surface.
Fluids play an important role in geothermal system utilization,
since they are necessary for transporting heat from the reservoir to
the surface. The volume of produced ﬂuids determines whether a
geothermal play system is economic. The appropriate balance
between production and injection of thermal ﬂuids inﬂuences
the economic life-time of a geothermal reservoir. Moreover, the
ﬂuid chemistry has major effects on the efﬁciency and life-time of
a reservoir and the material selection of technical installations to
minimize phenamona such as corrosion and mineral precipitation
(i.e. scaling). It is, therefore, important to understand the reservoir
ﬂuids' origin, chemistry, recharge characteristics, and meteoric
water content. Hochstein [9] points to the inﬂuence of steep
topography
in
geothermal
play
systems,
which
cause
large
volumes of meteoric water recharge into convective geothermal
plays via high inﬁltration rates. The inﬂuence of steep terrain on
the hydraulic head is not only signiﬁcant in volcanic ﬁeld settings
as in Hochstein's concept but also in sedimentary basin settings
Fig. 1. Geothermal ﬁelds installed worldwide in a plate tectonic setting. Geothermal play types with example ﬁelds: CV – Convection dominated heat transfer,
CD – conduction dominated heat transfer. (List of geothermal ﬁelds from http://geothermal-powerplant.blogspot.com; www.thinkgeoenergy.com; Zheng and Dong, 2008 [30]; plate
tectonic map based on Frisch and Löschke, [31]).
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
870

adjacent to mountain belts. The hydrogeologic model for the
Alberta Basin incorporates the effects of topographic relief on
inﬁltration of ﬂuids into the basin [32], that hosts low enthalpy
conduction-dominated systems in different carbonates and tight
(i.e. low permeability) sandstones [33]. Thus, the effects of steep
terrain can be important for inﬁltration in both high and low
enthalpy systems.
The majority of the world's operating geothermal power plants
produce electricity in settings where faults transect much of the
lithosphere, or where magma chambers occur (Fig. 1). Deep
reaching faults and active volcanism characterize active plate
tectonic margins. Understanding the processes of active tectonism
at different scales may be crucial for characterizing convection-
dominated, high enthalpy geothermal resources. In conduction-
dominated, low enthalpy geothermal plays, it is crucial to under-
stand the entire geodynamic evolution, particularly the role of
faults and fractures in the present-day stress ﬁeld. Therefore, it
may be prudent to catalog geothermal play systems according to
their plate tectonic setting, heat source (magmatic/intrusive or
non-magmatic), and geologic controls on heat transport mechan-
ism, storage system and permeability structure.
The
following
sections
incorporate
the
existing
catalog
schemes for geothermal resources and place them into a plate
tectonic and structural geological context. Each new catalog class
of geothermal play is documented by a well-known or studied
type locality.
4. Geologic controls on geothermal plays
4.1. Convection-dominated geothermal plays
Active plate tectonic processes are dominated by the dynamic
interplay between lithosphere and asthenosphere, which is driven
by mantle convection. Active tectonism and volcanism are pre-
dominantly found at active plate margins and represent favorable
settings for high enthalpy, convection-dominated geothermal play
systems. Favorable tectonic settings include: (I) magmatic arcs
above subduction zones in convergent plate margins (e.g. the
Sunda arc or the Philippine-Japan arc); (II) divergent margins
located within oceanic settings (e.g. the mid-Atlantic ridge), or
intracontinental settings (e.g. East African rift); (III) transform
plate margins with strike-slip faults (e.g. the San Andreas or
Alpine faults) and (IV) intraplate ocean islands formed by hot spot
magmatism (e.g. Hawaii). Major fault zones can transect much of
the lithosphere and can act as major ﬂuid conduits that connect to
crustal regions of elevated heat ﬂow caused by upwelling astheno-
sphere (e.g. asthenospheric wedge at subduction zones, astheno-
spheric bulge beneath rifts) and tectonic denudation of warm
middle to lower crust (metamorphic core complex in extensional
terrains) [31].
In convection-dominated geothermal plays, upward circulation
of ﬂuids transports heat from depth to shallower reservoirs, or to
the surface. These play systems occur in areas of active tectonism
[34], active volcanism [35], young plutonism (o3 Ma) and ele-
vated heat ﬂow caused by extensional tectonics [36,22]. Hochstein
et al. [37] use a similar catalog scheme for comparable geologic
settings and describe advective geothermal systems in tectonically
active regions. These authors emphasize the impact of the terrain
topography, which they describe as a moderate to mountainous
terrain combined with a hydrogeological setting that forces con-
vection [37]. Convection-dominated plays are controlled by either
an igneous activity like a magma chamber in volcanic areas, or
faults in extensional terrains, or both, such as intrusive bodies at
fault zones (Fig. 2). The ﬂuids originate commonly from inﬁltration
of meteoric water from high elevation and may also involve partial
mixing with magmatic ﬂuids [35]. A cataloging scheme for
convection-dominated play systems is illustrated in Fig. 2 with
magmatic play types in volcanic and plutonic ﬁelds on the one side
and fault controlled geothermal plays in domains with extensional
local or regional deformation on the other side.
4.1.1. Magmatic geothermal plays–volcanic ﬁeld and plutonic type
Magmatic play systems can be found in regions with active
basaltic volcanism at divergent plate margins as on Iceland,
basaltic to andesitic volcanism along island arcs as on Java [35],
recent andesitic to dacitic volcanism as along the south American
Andeans or Taiwan and along continent-continent convergent
margins with recent plutonism, as in the southern periphery of
the Alpine orogeny [38]. Magma chambers in volcanic ﬁelds, with
their parental melts, recharge of basalt and crystallized melts,
control ﬂuid chemistry, ﬂuid ﬂow and the overall geothermal play
system. These systems can be separated into an upﬂow zone and
an outﬂow zone [9] (Figs. 2 and 3). In contrast, a pluton crystal-
lized from magma and slowly cooling below the surface, can be
several hundreds of meters to some kilometers in dimension and
include batholiths, stocks, dikes, sills, laccoliths and lopoliths. The
presence and scale of a heat source in these play types may be
controlled by the age of magmatism: Active and recent magma-
tism commonly indicates a viable underlying heat source [39],
while inactive or extinct magmatism may be reﬂected by large-
scale igneous intrusions at greater depth (45 km depth), with
remnant heat and heating by radioactive decay in granitic rock.
The terms active, recent and inactive magmatism used in this
article follow the deﬁnitions of McCoy-West et al. [39], with active
magmatism related to volcanism o500 years old, recent magma-
tism related to volcanism 500–50,000 years old, and inactive or
extinct magmatism related to volcanism 450,000 years old.
The primary reservoir and target for large-scale power produc-
tion in a magmatic geothermal play along island arcs is the high
temperature upﬂow zone. In contrast, the outﬂow zone is
Fig. 2. Catalog scheme for convection dominated geothermal play systems based on the geologic controls of igneous activity as magmatism (volcanic type with typus locality
Java, Indonesia), recent plutonism (intrusion type with typus locality Laderello Italy in the periphery of the Alpine orogeny), and absent igneous activity but signiﬁcant active
extension (extensional domain type with typus locality Basin and Range, western USA.). 1 – Play type, 2 – Typus locality, 3 – Plate tectonic setting, 4 – Geologic habitate of
potential geothermal reservoirs, 5 – Heat transfer type, 6 – Geologic controls.
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
871

generally referred to as a secondary reservoir (of medium to low
temperature) and can be utilized for small power plants if ﬂow
rate is sufﬁcient [9]. The temperature gradient at the outﬂow zone
typically increases at shallow depth and declines below the out-
ﬂow layer (Fig. 3). Typical outﬂow springs spread out at the toe of
the outﬂow are accompanied by travertine and temperatures
between 40–100 1C [16]. However, outﬂow springs do not reﬂect
a high temperature geothermal play system below the spring.
Geothermal manifestations in the upﬂow zone are acidic springs
associated with thermo-chemically altered rock forming alteration
clays that indicate high temperature plays below the spring. The
upﬂow zone commonly consists of a vapor-dominated part above
a liquid-dominated part. Condensate layers in steep terrain, such
as volcanoes, can conceal high temperature play systems. Con-
densate layers are generated by upwelling ﬂuids condensed at a
certain depth above heat source (Fig. 3). Such layers can neutralize
initially acidic ﬂuids [40]. The outﬂow from such condensate layers
acquires the cation content of the condensate layer, and its
geochemistry is modiﬁed from the original vapor in the geother-
mal system [9]. The necessary condition for the formation of
condensate layers is a low permeability domain of o0.04 mD at
the depth of the steam-water boundary in vapor-dominated
systems [40]. The most famous geothermal plays with condensate
layers exist at Laderello (Italy), with other examples at Kamojang
hot springs and Tangkubanprahu warm springs (both West Java/
Indonesia). Whereas island arc volcanism with associated basaltic
to andesitic extrusions forms the typical upﬂow zone – outﬂow
zone assembly, continental arc volcanism involves andesitic to
dacitic magma. If the magma chamber is not recharged with
basaltic melts, continental arc related geothermal plays may
exhibit characteristics of outﬂow zones. Effectively, maximum
temperatures ofo240 1C are lower [41,42] in continental than in
island arc related geothermal play systems, which can have
maximum temperatures of 4300 1C [43].
The difference between the Laderello-type (i.e. plutonic play
type) and the Java-type (i.e. volcanic ﬁeld play type) in this catalog
scheme (Fig. 2) is that Laderello is associated with recent pluton-
ism (Fig. 4) and extension [38], and Java is associated with active
volcanism (Fig. 3) typical for magmatic arcs along convergent
margins or mid-oceanic ridge settings. Other examples for the
Java-type are geothermal play systems in Iceland, which are
related to a mid-oceanic ridge environment at a divergent plate
margin. Plutonism controlled geothermal systems are typically
located along continent-continent convergent or transform mar-
gins with recent magmatism and with (e.g. Larderello) or without
(e.g.
the
Geysers)
recent
recharge
of
meteoric
water
[44].
In Laderello, 1.3–3.8 Ma granite intrusions are associated with
young (0.3–0.2 Ma) magmatism. This magmatism generates a
Fig. 3. Geothermal play type related to an active volcanic ﬁeld typical for a magmatic arc setting above a subduction zone (compiled and modiﬁed from [9,16]).
Fig. 4. Geothermal play type related to recent plutonic ﬁelds typically found at intrusions along continent-continent or continent-oceanic convergent or transform margins.
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
872

ﬂuid-dominated (K-horizon) layer above the granite and a vapor-
dominated (H-horizon) layer above the ﬂuid-dominated layer.
Pliocene extension associated with the emplacement of magmatic
rocks generates low-angle normal faults that control the recharge
of meteoric water into the high temperature system [38]. The
Geysers ﬁeld is another example of this play type, where a large
felsic pluton provides the heat source for a vapor dominated ﬂuid
in porous meta-sedimentary reservoir capped by a low perme-
ability serpentinite, mélange and meta-greywacke [44] (Fig. 4).
The lack of natural recharge requires injection of treated sewage to
keep the recovery at a high level [45].
Indications and exploration methods for magmatic (both volcanic
ﬁeld and plutonic) geothermal play systems are the following:
4.1.1.1. Typical reservoir rock types. Various types of volcanic rocks
(various types of basalt, intermediate to felsic lava ﬂows, ash-ﬂow
tuffs)
and sedimentary
rock. Indicative rocks are travertine
deposits at the end of outﬂow zones.
4.1.1.2. Typical ﬂuid types. Upﬂow zone: acid sulfate waters, gas
from magma chamber: SO2, HCl, HF, CO2, H2S, low pH from 0–3 [9].
Outﬂow zone: Sodium chloride, neutral to alkaline pH, mixing
with meteoric water, Ca-rich, low-Mg, Gas: CO2 and H2S.
4.1.1.3. Typical exploration methods
 Detailed study of geothermal surface manifestations, hydro-
geological regimes and geological settings, as well as geochem-
ical analysis of streams, diluted thermal ﬂuids, hot springs and
groundwater wells.
 Resistivity surveys (Magnetotelluric) to identify the high resis-
tivity anomaly of upﬂow zone.
 The concept of minimum power potential is based on observed
natural heat loss over a thermal reservoir [46], from which it
is assumed that thermal ﬂuids causing observed positive
temperature anomalies at the surface can be produced by an
unspeciﬁed number of wells. This method requires an exten-
sive
program
of
shallow
temperature
measurements.
Assessments of heat loss in these systems are often under-
estimated and inaccurate. The method was developed 30 years
ago when computer power and software was not available to
calculate ﬂuid volumes from 3D geological models at certain
depths. Today, remote sensing and software solutions deliver
much more accurate results.
 Only at upﬂow zones: empirical geothermometers (Na–K–Ca) [47].
 At upﬂow and outﬂow zones: thermodynamic geothermometers
[48], if not contaminated with Mg-bearing surface water.
4.1.1.4. Typical targets. In magmatic settings, such as volcanic arc
regions along convergent plate boundaries, the upﬂow region is
typically the target, rather than the outﬂow region, because of
higher temperatures.
4.1.2. Non-magmatic geothermal plays – extensional domains
Non-magmatic convection-dominated geothermal play systems
are either fault controlled or fault-leakage controlled. In purely fault
controlled play systems, convection occurs along the fault and is
commonly combined with inﬁltration of meteoric water along the
fault [49]. In fault-leakage controlled play systems, the ﬂuid leaks from
the fault into a permeable concealed layer. In turn, ﬂuids can move
from a permeable layer into the fault zone and from there to the
surface (Fig. 5). As thermal ﬂuids move away from the upwelling zone
along a fault zone, they mix with cooler groundwater or meteoric
water, as indicated by an increase of bicarbonate and magnesium and
decrease of boron, sulfate and chloride [50,51].
The Great Basin in the western U.S. is an example of a region
that
hosts
predominately
fault
controlled
geothermal
plays
[22,52–54]. The Great Basin, as part of the northern Basin and
Range Province, has experienced large-magnitude extension crus-
tal thinning and emplacement of metamorphic core complexes
throughout the Cenozoic [55]. All of these factors cause elevated
heat ﬂow. Late Cenozoic intrusions and volcanism coincided with
extension, but generally ceased by the late Miocene. Although several
small Cenozoic volcanic centers still exist in the Lake Lahontan Basin,
most of the geothermal play systems appear to be associated with
Fig. 5. Non-magmatic active geothermal play system in active extensional terrains with different types of reservoirs (1, 2a and 2b) (compiled from [9,16,22,49]). Type 1 is a
convection cell from inﬁltration to discharge along one fault. Temperature gradient is gradually increasing at well site 1. Type 2a and 2B are fault leakage controlled plays. The
temperature gradient of a well drilled into such an area rises up to the permeable layer and drops below the layer (well 2a and 2b).
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
873

Quaternary normal faulting and are clearly non-magmatic [56,57].
Ongoing geodetic measurements indicate continued trends of rapid
extension, suggesting that the crust is even thinner beneath the Lake
Lahontan Basin than in the surrounding areas [58].
New seismic data indicate that crustal thickness ranges between
24–44 km and even thinner crust along the NW-SE trending Walker
Lane belt [59]. These zones of thinner crust correspond to regions of
upwelling asthenosphere and higher heat ﬂow where the Moho has
moved closer to the surface. Fluids circulate deep within the crust and
transport heat to near the surface along permeable faults [60]. The age
and origin of thermal ﬂuids is still controversial but seem to be of
meteoric origin [61] and of Pleistocene age (10–30 ka), when the area
was covered by the large Lahontan Lake system. Most of the data from
Dixie Valley indicate ages of thermal ﬂuids between 12–14 ka,
whereas the recharge age is between 900a and 5 ka [62]. Only some
of these geothermal plays have surface expression; most of the
resources are concealed. Another example of extensional terrain
geothermal plays is Western Turkey [36] or tectonically active intra-
continental rift grabens, such as the East African rift or the Upper
Rhine graben in Central Europe.
Fluid ﬂow along faults is controlled by the state of stress in the
crust. Fault stress modeling could help to identify favorable faults
for geothermal energy production from a complex fault pattern
[53,63]. Dilational or shear dilation faults seem to be most the
favorable structures [54,64]. Due to the presence of fossil geother-
mal ﬂuids, proper re-injection and maintenance of reservoir
pressures are crucial to the management of reservoirs in the Great
Basin. Re-injection into fault controlled geothermal plays requires
a careful selection of well sites to avoid thermal breakthrough of
injected cooled water along permeable faults to the production
wells. Injection and production wells should not be placed along
the same fault in the same fault block.
Characteristic for non-magmatic convection-dominated geother-
mal plays are as compiled in the following section:
4.1.2.1. Typical reservoir rock types. Various from volcanic, plutonic
or to sedimentary rock; travertine and silica at hot springs are
indicative for reservoirs at depth.
4.1.2.2. Typical ﬂuid types. High-Cl and high-HCO3, low-(Ca, Mg).
4.1.2.3. Typical exploration methods
 MT (magnetotelluric) is the standard method for reservoirs
4500 m depth combined with surface mapping and shallow
temperature drilling [65].
 Other resistivity methods are used, such as AMT (audiomagneto-
tellurics) and CSAMT (controlled source audiomagnetotellurics) for
shallow reservoirs o500 m depth on a case-by-case basis [65].
 Density methods, such as gravity and recently microgravity, are
used to identify lithology, dense alteration (siliciﬁcation), and
volcano or basin geometry. Active seismics are used to develop
seismic velocity models.
 Reﬂection seismic in volcanic areas often gives poor results and
cannot identify hot ﬂuids, but in a graben and basin setting it is
useful to deﬁne structural settings.
 (Airborne) magnetic surveys are employed to map near-surface
alteration and iron-rich volcanic rocks.
 Geochemistry combined with geologic mapping and resistivity
surveys to map clay cap alteration and leaking points.
 Self-potential methods (natural surface voltages) are used for
mapping hydrology in areas of low relief.
 All methods combined with differential Global Positioning
System contribute to geothermal potential maps [66], and
regional geothermal Geographic Information System (GIS) can
be developed [67].
 Satellite Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) has
been recently applied to image structures with lateral outﬂow
of thermal ﬂuids by showing areas of subsidence associated with
ﬂuid production and areas of uplift related to injection [68].
 Analysis of fault evolution to identify the fault blocks and
settings with higher fracture density [52].
4.1.2.4. Typical
targets. Dilational
and
shear-dilational
faulting
regimes
[22];
fault
intersections;
and
extensional
domains
in
convergent settings, especially when linked with high topographic
relief. Mountain ranges nearby where meteoric water inﬁltrates to
deep hot regions might represent favorable targets in fault controlled
non-magmatic geothermal systems. Convergent settings contain a
variety of extensional domains including back-arc basins, pull-apart
basins or graben structures. Hydraulic gradients and potential ﬂuid
pathways along faults need to be identiﬁed to utilize the geothermal
potential of these sites. Combined with new geothermal plant
technologies, these fault controlled geothermal systems of medium
temperature
(1501730 1C)
could
be
developed
to
small-scale
geothermal programs providing energy for small communities even
in remote areas. Such concepts would increase the geothermal
potential of convergent plate settings.
4.2. Conduction dominated geothermal plays
Geothermal plays in passive plate tectonic settings where no
asthenospheric anomalies occur (e.g. passive continental margins
and intracontinental tectonically inactive areas) are mainly con-
duction-dominated, as exempliﬁed by the conductive settings of
sedimentary basins. In conduction-dominated hydrothermal play
systems, deep aquifers are heated by a near normal heat ﬂow. In
Fig. 6. Conduction dominated geothermal play types, ranging from intracratonic basins to foreland basins of orogenic belts with its characteristic foredeep to basement
(igneous or metamorphic) provinces. Geologic controls in conduction dominated plays are either litho- or biofacies of sedimentary rock and faults and fractures. Typically
these play types are lacking active faulting and seismicity. Labels are as in Fig. 2.
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
874

basement or crystalline igneous rocks, referred to as petrothermal
systems, locally elevated heat production originates from granites
and can lead to a signiﬁcant positive temperature anomaly, such as
at the EGS reservoir in granitic rock in Soultz-sous-Forêt [69].
Petrothermal EGS resources lack producible formation ﬂuids and
require that ﬂuids are injected through an artiﬁcial fracture
network.
Conduction-dominated geothermal play systems came into
focus due to new developments in EGS technologies. The reason
for this focus is that the naturally non-commercial conditions
associated with conductive geothermal play systems can be
improved by reservoir creation in crystalline rock or reservoir
enhancement in tight i.e. low permeability aquifer rocks. These
systems
can
be
classiﬁed
into
hydrothermal
and
non-
hydrothermal (or petrothermal, i.e. hot dry rock systems) with a
permeability anisotropy predominantly being fault controlled and/
or litho- or biofacies controlled (Fig. 6). Applying advanced
reservoir technology and engineering to developing man-made
geothermal technology reservoirs and improving their efﬁciency is
more important in conduction dominated play systems than in
convection-dominated play systems. Therefore, classifying and
understanding potential EGS settings in conduction-dominated
play systems is essential. This classiﬁcation contains three differ-
ent settings: (I) the intracratonic basin type, (II) the orogenic belt
type and (III) the basement/crystalline rock type. These types are
further considered with respect to the porosity-permeability ratio
of the reservoir rock and the absence or presence of producible
ﬂuids in the reservoir (Fig. 6).
4.2.1. Igneous geothermal plays– basement type
Crystalline (e.g. granitic) rocks host vast resources of heat
energy in igneous provinces, which often underlie large areas of
continents. These low porosity-low permeability rocks require
reservoir development by stimulation techniques to allow circula-
tion between injector and producer wells, with the rock mass
acting as the heat exchanger. This concept is referred to as Hot Dry
Rock (HDR). The engineering of an augmented permeability
structure between the wells constitutes a primary challenge of
EGS development in crystalline rock. The most important factor for
reservoir engineering in these plays is the stress ﬁeld. The
magnitude of the intermediate principal stress is of particular
importance, because this controls the in situ stress regime.
Geomechanical parameters and failure models of the reservoir
rock
under
stimulation
conditions
need
to
be
considered.
To produce electricity reasonably efﬁciently requires water tem-
peratures exceeding 180 1C [70]. The generally accepted perfor-
mance target for a well doublet is a production rate of 50 l/s and
minimum rock temperature of 200 1C (e.g. [71,3]). However, the
speciﬁc end-user needs must be considered, and perhaps crystal-
line rocks can be used for direct heat as well as electricity in areas
where there are low-temperatures. In Alberta, for example, lower
temperature in the basement from the Alberta Basin would help to
augment the efﬁciency of oil sand production by replacing
volumes of natural gas with geothermal energy [72]. In Central
Europe, the population density and infrastructure justify district
heating as prime use of geothermal energy. In the following
chapter, geological environments of EGS types are reviewed. The
most important HDR sites are summarized in Table 2.
Characteristic for igneous basement geothermal plays are:
4.2.1.1. Typical rock types. Rocks with elevated heat production
containing radiogenic heat producing elements as Thorium or
Uranium as found crystalline rocks and intrusive rocks.
4.2.1.2. Typical ﬂuid types. Need to be injected.
4.2.1.3. Typical exploration methods
 Depending
on
the
temperature,
depth
and
lithological
sequence, several geophysical methods are used, such as
magnetotelluric and gravity to detect the granitic body and
reﬂection seismic to identify facture zones.
 Geosystem analysis is necessary to estimate stress ﬁeld and
hydromechanical conditions. Relatively early the ﬁrst exploration
well is drilled to obtain petrophysical and mineralogical para-
meters and to verify the stress ﬁeld for stimulation concepts.
4.2.1.4. Typical targets. Crystalline rock and fracture zones therein.
4.2.2. Non-magmatic geothermal plays – intracratonic basins
and orogenic belts
Conduction dominated geothermal play systems without active
igneous activity cover the different types of geologic settings
located within intracratonic basins (i.e. within the stable conti-
nental crust) and within orogenic belts and associated foreland
basins. The tectonic activity in these settings is commonly low to
absent. Advective heat transport may play a role in mountainous
areas of the orogenic belt type, where high permeability domains
and deep rooted faults allow deep circulation of meteoric water.
This type of circulation is often associated with the subsequent
formation of hot springs [77]. Geothermal play systems in moun-
tain belts are rarely associated with hydrothermal reservoirs, but
are rather the result of deep circulation systems associated with
complex major crustal scale faults. These areas typically contain
low to moderate heat ﬂow [78]. In sedimentary basin settings,
conduction-dominated hydrothermal plays are located in deep
aquifers heated by a near normal heat ﬂow. Effectively, sedimen-
tary basins host prime aquifer systems from where the thermal
water can be produced and utilized. The exploration target is to
identify high porosity/high permeability or high porosity/low
Table 2
Selection of key sites for HDR activities in different tectonic regimes and with different major lessons learned during development or operation. HPHT-High Pressure High
Temperature conditions.
Project
Activity time
Tectonic regime
Depth
(km)
Temperature
(1C)
Lessons learned
Fenton hill new
Mexico/USA
1972–1996
(research)
Magma chamber under a young caldera normal
faulting [73]
2.8
320
No signiﬁcant temperature drop after
11 months water loop 43 wells are necessary
for efﬁciency
3.6
4.2
Rosemanowes/UK
1978–1991
Batholith normal faulting [74]
2.5
85
Stimulation and proppant techniques,
multi-cell reservoir design [74]
Soultz/France
1987-present
(research)
Horst at upper hine graben normal to
strike-slip regime [75]
3.3
200
Stimulation techniques Induced seismicity
5
Cooper Basin/
Australia
2003-present
(commercial)
Inverted basin reverse faulting regime [76]
4.2
240
Borehole and reservoir stability
under HPHT conditions
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
875

permeability domains at different temperature levels. Commonly,
these hydrothermal systems occur at great depth (43 km). Low
permeability domains in sedimentary basins may represent EGS
resources where the permeability (and hence the productivity)
need to be enhanced by a variety of reservoir stimulation techni-
ques [79,80]. However, it is debatable if reservoir stimulation in
tight sedimentary rock provides sustainable and sufﬁcient ﬂow
rates when substantial natural fracture permeability is lacking [3].
The success of EGS in tight, hot sedimentary aquifers may be
strongly affected by the storage capacity expressed by porosity of
the host rock [4]. The heat content of the ﬂuid in the porous layer
setting is strongly affected by the basin geometry, an artifact of the
basin type and evolution (Fig. 7).
Two different basin types have been distinguished for hydro-
thermal sedimentary energy systems: (I) Extensional or litho-
spheric subsidence basins, such as the Central European Basin
System, and (II) foreland basins within orogenic belts, such as the
Molasse Basin of the Alps or the Western Canada Sedimentary
Basin associated with the Rocky Mountains. The sedimentary
sequences in foreland basins are inﬂuenced by signiﬁcant crustal
subsidence (up to several kilometers) towards the orogen due to
the weight of the thickened crust of the orogenic belt and loading
of erosional products from the mountain belt on the non-
thickened crust. The result of this process is lithospheric bending
that forms areas of local extension and normal faulting in compres-
sional plate tectonic settings (Fig. 8) [23]. The wedge shape of
foreland basins with the down-bending of aquifer rock may cause
local positive geothermal gradients, especially when faults or highly
permeable layers allow advective heat transport from the deeper to
the shallower parts of a foreland basin. Faults and reef complexes are
prime reservoir targets in the carbonate rock of the Bavarian Molasse
Basin, Germany [23]. Highly permeable, porous sandstone in the
Williston Basin of Saskatchewan, Canada and North Dakota, U.S.A.
host potential geothermal resources [81].
In the adjacent mountain belt, groundwater ﬂow and thermal
gradient are strongly inﬂuenced by large hydraulic heads resulting
from the pronounced topographic relief [82,83]. The great depth
and small width of mountain belt valleys result in relatively
shallow penetration of recharged water, which then discharge on
valley ﬂoors or shallow valley slopes [81]. Thermal highs occur
underneath high mountains and thermal lows beneath the valleys
(Fig. 8), resulting in varying local thermal gradients due to
meteoric water circulation. Beneath high mountains at about
15–20 1C and beneath deep valleys 30–50 1C [83,77]. The near
surface geothermal gradient can be disturbed in recharge areas of
the mountain ranges where inﬁltrating water cools the rock mass.
Similarly, the heat ﬂow ranging from low to moderate to high in
mountain belts [77] needs to be corrected by the amount of heat
loss during the ice-age and other paleoclimatic effects [84]. The
formation of geothermal plays in mountain chains is dominated by
the bulk-rock permeability of the host rock. The permeability
allows the inﬁltration of meteoric water, especially in the high
relief areas. Highly permeable faults act as ﬂuid ﬂow pathways to
discharge spring locations. Grasby and Hutcheon [77] point out
that high permeability of fractured rock, groundwater ﬂux and
deep circulating ﬂuids, combined with advective heat transport
Fig. 7. Schematic cross section of an intracratonic sedimentary basin and various geothermal play types at different depth and temperature ranges. Temperature is an
average assuming a geothermal gradient of 32 1C/km. A – Geothermal plays above 3 km depth with temperature suitable for district heating, B – Deep geothermal plays
below 3 km depth suitable for heating and electricity, C – Very deep geothermal plays below 4 km depth as potential HDR systems.
Fig. 8. Geothermal play types in orogenic belt and adjacent foreland basins. Red lines – Schematic isotherm distribution, recharge locations, fault geometry and basin
geometry after Craw et al., [83]. Blue lines – Water ﬂow lines result from heat advection and topography controlled hydraulic head, blue arrows – Discharge temperatures [86]. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article).
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
876

are most critical for the formation of hot springs in mountain
belts. Hot springs temperatures depend on the transit time of the
inﬁltration water, the circulation depth of the ﬂuid, the rock
permeability, geometry of major thrust faults, lateral ramps and
bedding planes (Fig. 8). This type of geothermal play might be
vulnerable to thermal water production if the production rate is
not adjusted to the recharge volume over time. The transit time
for meteoric water in mountainous areas ranges from several
decades to over 5,000 years depending on the rock's effective
porosity [62]. The transient time is the time that the ﬂuid requires
to migrate from the recharge area to the spring. Mountain belts
and adjacent foreland basins are referred to as Cordillera-cum-
foreland basins in the classiﬁcation scheme for groundwater ﬂow
systems after Toth [82]. Mountain belts and their associated
foreland basins are hydraulically disconnected by the frontal fault
of the foothills due to the fact that most of the water recharged in
the mountains discharge in valley ﬂoors at about the same
elevation as the average foreland basin elevation. Effectively,
circulating meteoric water in mountain belts has a shallow
penetration depth, with not much water left for deeper circulation
towards the foreland basin [82].
In contrast to foreland basins, intracratonic basins that origi-
nate from lithospheric subsidence are commonly divided into
several sub-basins [85]. The long history of intracratonic basins
produce several kilometer thick sediment ﬁlls that span a wide
range of deposits, including ﬂuvial siliciclastics, marine carbo-
nates, muds and evaporites. Basin evolution and subsidence rates
have a major effect on faulting and fault pattern characteristics,
diagenetic processes and the resulting increase or decrease of
porosity. High and low porosity domains are controlled by
lithology, faulting, and diagenesis [86,87]. Permeability anisotropy
is controlled by either lithology or faults or both. Recently, new
concepts for complex coupled process modeling have been
developed for geothermal systems. These models incorporate
geomechanical facies at various scales [88], which require the
examination of facies-dependent geomechanical parameters [88].
Application oriented basin analysis and sequence stratigraphy
is the key to successfully developing conduction dominated
geothermal plays in sedimentary basins. As schematically illu-
strated in Fig. 7, geothermal reservoirs are located in different
basin portions depending on the internal present-day structure of
the basin. Crustal regions above salt formations might be suitable
geothermal reservoirs for district heating, because the high
thermal conductivity of salt rock causes local positive thermal
anomalies in the overburden of salt accumulations [89–91].
In deeper parts of the basin (below 3 km depth), geothermal
systems might be suitable for power and heat production,
provided EGS technology is applied to enhance productivity up
to the required ﬂow rate of 50–70 l/s [92,3,93]. A critical para-
meter for EGS technology is the in-situ stress ﬁeld, because large
scale
injection
and
successful
hydraulic
stimulation
require
knowledge of stress direction and magnitudes (e.g. [94,26]). The
slip tendency method is an appropriate technique for estimating
the fault reactivation potential prior to stimulation. This is an
essential measure for minimizing induced seismicity during large
scale injection [25].
The geological environment of sedimentary basins is generally
well studied through hydrocarbon exploration, and substantial
databases from seismic surveys and drilling can be re-evaluated
for geothermal assessment and ﬁeld development [27]. Explora-
tion methods for geothermal targets might differ slightly from
hydrocarbon exploration, since temperature needs to be mapped
in addition to reservoir quality. Recent advances in the combined
use of neural networks and subsequent joint interpretation of
magnetotelluric data, seismic tomography and lithostratigraphy
might lead to new exploration strategies for these geothermal
Table 3
Catalog of geothermal play types applying the scheme from Figs. 2 and 5. Examples represent typical geologic systems in which geothermal reservoirs are already discovered and developed. These examples might act as typus
localities for respective geothermal play types. Reservoir characteristics host rock, ﬂuid type and temperature range refer to the examples and do not reﬂect necessarily general characteristics. Categories of ﬂuid types: Basinal ﬂuids
are saline brines and NaCl-dominated, inﬁltration ﬂuids are carbonate waters and HCO3-dominated, crustal ﬂuids are acidic and H2S/HCl-dominated (modiﬁed from [80]).
Heat transfer
Geologic controls
Geologic system plate tectonic
setting
Geothermal play type
Index Examples
Characteristics
Host rock
Fluid
Temperature
in (1C)
Convection
Dominated
(CV)
Magma chambers in active
volcanic ﬁelds
Volcanic arc regions at subduction
zone
Volcanic type
CV1
Java - Kamojang (Indonesia)
[99]
Andesites
Crustal ﬂuids mixed with inﬁltration
ﬂuids (meteoric, seawater)
70–320
Rhyolithes
Taupo – NZ [100]
Mid oceanic Ridges (MOR)
Reykjanes – Iceland [101]
Basalt
Mantle plumes (hot spots)
Hawai (USA) [102]
Crystallizing magma,
intrusionsþactive faulting
Decrescent volcanism in steep
terrain at young orogenic belts
Plutonic type
CV2
Larderello (Italy) [103]
Sediments Granite, Grabbo
Inﬁltration and crustal ﬂuids
100–350
The Geysers (USA)
Active faulting (natural
seismicity)
Metamorphic core complexes
Extensional domain type CV3
Great Basin (Basin and
Range) – USA [22]
Volcanic sedimentary rock
variable
150–240
Pull-apart basins
Western Turkey Soultz-
sous-Forêt (France) [71]
Back-arc basins Intracontinental
rifts (grabens)
Conduction
Dominated
(CD)
Lithofacies (grain size,
mineralogy)
Intracontinental rift basins
Intracratonic Basin Type
(hydrothermal)
CD1
North German Basin [27]
High–low permeability
ﬂuvial sediments
Basinal ﬂuids
o150
Biofacies (fossil content)
Passive margin basins
Litho-/biofaciesþfaults/
fractures
Fold-and-Thrust-belts
Orogenic belt type
(hydrothermal)
CD2
Molasse Basin (South
Germany) [23]
High–low permeability
marine sediments
Inﬁltration ﬂuids (basinal ﬂuids
possible)
o160
Foreland basins
Faults/fractures
Intracontinental intrusion in ﬂat
terrain
Basement type
(petrothermal hot dry
rock)
CD3
Cooper Basin (Australia)
Granite rock with high
radiogenic heat production
–
150–320
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
877

plays [95,96]. Target zones, their characteristics and exploration
methods are:
4.2.2.1. Typical reservoir rock types. Terrestrial sedimentary rocks
such as eolian and ﬂuvial siliciclastic sequences and shallow to
deep marine sediments from carbonates sequences to shale and
pelagic clays; deltaic and pelagic sediments can be source rock for
H2S.
4.2.2.2. Typical ﬂuid types. High-Cl brines.
Inﬁltration water, rich in HCO3
.
4.2.2.3. Typical exploration methods
 D/3D seismic surveys.
 Re-processing of existing seismic reﬂection as often available
(but not always accessible) from hydrocarbon exploration.
 Reconnaissance from existing well and seismic data.
 Joint
interpretation
of
magnetotelluric
and
reﬂection
seismic data.
 Appraisal wells including well log and core data. Often, apprai-
sal wells are planned as future operating well why it is drilled
in larger diameters compared to gas exploration wells.
4.2.2.4. Typical targets. High porosity/high permeability domains
or high porosity/low permeability domains in sedimentary rock;
fault and fracture zones, damage zones of faults, and karst zones in
carbonate rock.
5. Discussion
The new catalog for geothermal play types based on geological
controls outlined here allows a better evaluation of site-speciﬁc
exploration, ﬁeld development and overall selection of geothermal
applications. Table 3 demonstrates the application of the catalog to
existing discovered geothermal ﬁelds worldwide by ordering
geothermal play types according to their geologic habitat and
dominant geologic controls. Moreover, the catalog allows compar-
ison with hydrocarbon play systems, which, in turn, facilitates
selection of appropriate technology transfer from hydrocarbon to
geothermal reservoirs. The comparison with hydrocarbon reser-
voirs applies especially to conduction dominated geothermal play
systems and the related basin types. Hitherto, only hydrothermal
sedimentary play systems are developed for commercial use, with
a focus on foreland basins. This fact is exempliﬁed by the growing
geothermal industry in the Molasse Basin in Germany, Switzerland
and Austria (e.g. [87,97,98]).
One approach for evaluating conduction-dominated geother-
mal play systems is by their ratio of porosity to permeability.
In Table 4, different discovered geothermal reservoirs of both basin
and basement play type are compiled along with their depths and
reservoir rock type. The depth of geothermal plays might be an
important factor for successful long-term reservoir production.
Typically, the depth of a reservoir correlates with a reduction in
permeability and porosity due to high in situ stress and diagenetic
effects, both of which promote cementation. As shown at the EGS
research site Soultz-sous-Forêt, the most productive depth range is
between 1.7 and 3.5 km. However fault and fracture zones can
have positive effects on permeability at greater depths [104].
In Fig. 9, the geothermal play systems from Table 4 are
illustrated in a porosity-versus-permeability diagram with regard
to reservoir rock type. A similar reservoir classiﬁcation scheme has
been
developed
by
Salley
[85]
for
hydrocarbon
resources.
Table 4
Compilation of different geothermal reservoirs, their host rock formation, depth, porosity and permeability. CD1-Intracratonic basin play type, CD2-Foreland basin play type, CD3-Basement play type. The type indices refer to
indices in Table 3. Porosity and permeability data from: (1)Personal comment Blöcher and Hassanzadegan (GFZ) and references indicated by square brackets.
Type
Geological system
Formation/rock type
Depth range
Porosity in %
Permeability in mD
CD1a
North German Basin
Lower permian Rotliegend formation/red bed sandstone [106,107]
4.0–4.2 km
∅10
∅1–10
(8–12)
(0.01–120)
CD1b
North German Basin
Upper Triassic stuttgart formation/ﬂuvial weakly cemented sandstone [108]
630–710 m
∅26
∅100
(5–35)
(0.02–5000)
CD1c
North German Basin
Upper Triassic exter formation/ﬂuvial sandstone [87]
0.8–2.6 km
17–31
500–1000
CD1d
Alberta Basin, central part
Cambrian Basal sandstone [33,105]
2.5–5 km
10–19
0.4; 20-500
CD2a
Bavarian Molasse Basin
Upper Jurassic Bankkalk formation/massive carbonate rock, partly dolomitized [23,98,109]
3.2–3.6 km
(1)18.1
(1)2.5–0.003
CD2b
Alberta Basin, central part
Devonian Wabamun; Nisku; Cooking Lake formations/carbonate rock [33]
1.2–1.7 km
5.2,10.4, 8.3
4.8; 21.4; 27.7;
CD2c
Bavarian Molasse Basin, Western Part
Upper Jurassic/Tuberoidic limestone [23,104]
3.2–3.6 km
(1) ∅4.9
(1) 0.1–0.001
CD2d
Bavarian Molasse Basin
Upper Jurassic/Massenkalk facies, reef limestone [87,97,109,110]
3.2–3.6
2 to 2.5
2563; 6x103;
CD2e
Alberta Basin, central part
Devonian Leduc formation/reef complex [33]
7.3
141.7 (0.01–4700)
CD3
Basement rock Rhine graben shoulder (Soultz)
Crystalline rock/Granitic rock [104,111]
1–1.4 km
15
1–10
3.7–5 km
1
0.001
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
878

Carbonate rock with partly dissolved biogenic content and ﬁlled
pore space due to secondary dolomitization has a high porosity
versus a low permeability (type CD2a and b in Fig. 9), whereas
karstic and highly fractured carbonate rock, such as reef forma-
tions, have a low porosity versus high permeability (type CD2e and
2d in Fig. 9). The commercial geothermal prospects in Germany are
mostly in this latter reservoir type in a foreland basin play system
and can be considered as hydrothermal systems that do not
require EGS technology [87]. Sandstone formations are character-
ized by a proportional ratio of porosity to permeability, and this
ratio is obviously controlled by depth (CD1a–d in Fig. 9). The
deeper the sandstone formation, the less porosity and permeabil-
ity, although subsidence of sandstone can have positive effects on
porosity due to dissolved feldspar, carbonate and sulfate minerals
in diagenetic zones at 4140 1C [86]. However, quartz cement,
illite and chlorite form as products from feldspar dissolution and
can decrease porosity [105]. As a result, sandstones shallower than
1 km have a high porosity/permeability ratio and can be classiﬁed
as hydrothermal systems, whereas deeper sandstone formations
have a lower permeability and can be classiﬁed as EGS hydro-
thermal systems, which require technology to increase reservoir
productivity. Crystalline rock, as found in Soultz-sous-Forêt, can be
classiﬁed as an EGS hydrothermal play if porosity and permeability
is high enough as in the upper portions of the Soultz-sous-Forêt
geothermal ﬁeld, or EGS petrothermal if porosity is so reduced
that producible ﬂuids are absent (CD3 in Fig. 9). In this latter case,
ﬂuids have to be added to the systems, as described above under
the Hot Dry Rock site in Table 2.
Comparable with hydrocarbon reservoirs, most geothermal
plays have a similar porosity/permeability ratio as tight sand-
stones (Fig. 9) [86]. This opens the possibility of technology
transfer from unconventional hydrocarbon resources to geother-
mal resources. Experience from reservoir quality evaluation,
stimulation, system optimization, risk management and induced
seismicity can be adapted from unconventional hydrocarbon
technology to EGS resources and vice versa. In contrast to unconven-
tional hydrocarbon resources, the environmental beneﬁts of geother-
mal resources are near zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, along
with renewable energy production. Consequently, the technology
used in unconventional hydrocarbon resource development can be
employed for green energy production. Considering the impact of
GHG production on climate change and the growing public demand
for sustainability and environmental protection, an increased use of
geothermal energy can gradually lower GHG emissions. Depleted
hydrocarbon brown ﬁelds could be re-used as geothermal resources
and therefore renewable energy systems. Given the fact that geother-
mal energy will become increasingly economically competitive with
oil and gas [2], geothermal energy systems as unconventional reser-
voirs are both environmentally and eventually economically attractive.
6. Conclusion
Research on the geological characteristics of natural geother-
mal resources is essential to adapting stimulation and drilling
techniques that drives down the costs of EGS development. The
ability to create man-made geothermal reservoirs consistently is
mostly limited by a lack of understanding of how geothermal
reservoir formation occurs in nature. A geological-based geother-
mal play type catalog helps in understanding the nature of a
resource and deﬁning appropriate exploration strategies, reservoir
evaluation and quantiﬁcation of the geothermal potential.
There are two primary geothermal play types, the convection-
dominated play systems, which include the vast majority of operat-
ing geothermal power plants world-wide, and the conduction-
dominated geothermal play systems, which include hydrothermal
and petrothermal systems in sedimentary basins or crystalline rock.
Conduction-dominated play systems can be described by the ratio of
porosity versus permeability and with regards to the application as
EGS petrothermal, EGS hydrothermal or pure hydrothermal.
The advantage of a geologically based catalog scheme is the
adaptation of site-speciﬁc exploration and technology strategies
for ﬁeld development. This scheme is in contrast to catalog
schemes based on temperature, which say nothing speciﬁc about
the reservoir itself or best development practices. Targets for
geothermal resources are often coincident with other energy
resources including coal bed methane and unconventional gas
and oil. The knowledge of other factors such as energy storage,
Fig. 9. Porosity and permeability relation of different geothermal reservoirs with data points from Table 4. Porosity/permeability domains are characteristic for different
reservoir rock types. Numbers refer to type indices in Table 4. Reservoir performance as enhanced geothermal system (EGS) in petrothermal or hydrothermal setting is
similar to tight oil reservoirs in the Alberta Basin. Data points from references in Table 4, tight oil reservoir ratio from Hartmann and Beaumont [86].
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
879

groundwater systems, coal mining, and carbon geo-sequestration
need to be considered in evaluating the geothermal potential of a
region. The relationship between these competing geological
resource potentials needs to be understood for the best decision
at site and depth. Trans-national projects, such as the EU-funded
GeoMol project, www.geomol.eu, which is aimed at collecting and
evaluating data from the Alpine foreland basins in Europe, are a
step in the right direction towards a sustainable utilization of
limited subsurface geo-resources, especially in highly populated
areas as Central Europe.
The geological system based catalog of geothermal reservoirs
might also be important for optimal economic and environmental
conﬁgurations of geothermal energy conversion. Understanding a
geothermal reservoir as part of a geologic system helps to quantify
the geological uncertainty that needs to be included into economic
optimization concepts.
Geothermal energy from EGS and hydrothermal resources is
still in the technology development stage. As a result, there is a
high degree of uncertainty in cost estimates for producing heat
and electricity from deep geothermal resources. Worldwide,
though, there is a signiﬁcant ramp up in research and develop-
ment around these resources, so that their potential can be
realized. It is likely that costs will reduce with more efforts on
improving geothermal technology, along with the growing interest
in geothermal energy utilization.
Remarkably, the technology used for unconventional oil pro-
duction from sandstones and carbonates is similar to geothermal
EGS technology. If reservoirs are categorized as a function of their
porosity to permeability ratio, it becomes clear that most EGS
geothermal resources and unconventional tight sandstones belong
to one reservoir type. Cataloging geothermal resources by their
geologic controls helps to adopt site-speciﬁc exploration, ﬁeld
development
and
energy
production.
Successfully
developed
methods in exploration and geothermal energy deployment can
be adopted within one geothermal system type. Speciﬁcally, stress
ﬁeld analysis, quantitative structural geology, reservoir geomecha-
nics and reservoir engineering are key topics in both geothermal
and unconventional tight reservoirs. In contrast to unconventional
hydrocarbon
resources,
geothermal
energy
production
emits
nearly no greenhouse gases (GHG). There is enormous potential
for technology transfer; extraction technologies used for uncon-
ventional hydrocarbon reservoir extraction could be employed for
a green energy resource. The classiﬁcation scheme of petroleum
resources may encourage the geothermal community to classify
geothermal
resources by their chance
of
commercialization,
including categorization based on technological improvements.
Recognition and understanding of a geologic environment, with its
characteristic controls, are the fundamental ﬁrst step towards a
classiﬁcation scheme for geothermal resources.
This introduction to a new catalog may not be a complete
picture of geothermal play systems, but it might provide a logical
framework for a new scheme for typifying geothermal plays.
Hybrid play types may exist, for example in the East African rift
system, where crustal extension causes thinning of the crust and
the subsequent formation of magmatic intrusions and volcanism.
Effectively volcanic (CV1 in Table 3) and fault-controlled exten-
sional domain play types (CV3 in Table 3) may co-exist in the same
geologic system. Generally spoken, each play type lies within a
geological continuum, and it is possible for speciﬁc geothermal
systems to have geological characteristics of more than one play
type. This play type catalog, however, shall help to accelerate
technology and knowledge transfer within one appropriate play
type. As such, this new catalog is oriented towards successfully
developing geothermal resources worldwide. It is now possible to
better compare geothermal plays with hydrocarbon plays by
contrasting their geological environment and geologic controls.
It might be a feasible vision to transfer technology already
developed for unconventional hydrocarbons to the green sustain-
able energy of geothermal resources.
Acknowledgments
The author gratefully acknowledges the thorough review of
three anonymous reviewers, Larry Heaman and Jonathan Banks.
The review of the board of the International Geothermal Associa-
tion (IGA) substantially improved this article. Discussions with Jim
Faulds, Berry Goldstein, Graeme Beardsmore and Colin Harvey on
the general concept and requirements on geothermal play catalog
schemes are greatly appreciated. This research is funded by the
Campus Alberta Innovation Program on Enhanced Geothermal
Energy Systems, Alberta Innovates (project ID RES0010033).
References
[1] Bertani R. Geothermal power production in the world 2005–2010 update
report. In: Proceedings of WGC. Bali, Indonesia: 2010. paper 8: 41 p.
[2] Lund JW, Freeston DH, Boyd TL. Direct utilization of geothermal energy
worldwide review. In: Proceedings of the WGC. Bali, Indonesia: 2010. paper
7: 23 p.
[3] Tester JW, Anderson BJ, Batchelor AS, Blackwell DD, DiPippo R, Drake EM,
et al. Impact of enhanced geothermal systems on US energy supply in the
twenty-ﬁrst century. Philos Trans RSoc A Math, Phys Eng Sci 2007;365
(1853):1057–94.
[4] Rybach L. Geothermal systems, conductive heat ﬂow, geothermal anomalies.
In: Rybach L, Mufﬂer LJP, editors. Geothermal systems: Principles and case
histories. ChichesterUK: John Wiley & Sons; 1981. p. 3–31.
[5] Society of Petroleum Geologist (SPE). Petroleum Resources Management
System Guide for non-technical users. SPE – PRMS; 2007. 4 p.[cited 2013
June 13]. Available from: 〈http://www.spe.org/industry/docs/PRMS_guide_
non_tech.pdf〉.
[6] Allen PA, Allen JR. The Petroleum Play. In: Allen PA, Allen JR, editors. Basin
Analysis – Principles and Applications. 2nd ed.. Oxford UK: Wiley-Blackwell
Science Ltd.; 2005. p. 309–96.
[7] White DE, Williams DL. Assessment of geothermal resources in the United
States – 1975. USGS; 1975. Circular 726: 155 p.
[8] Mufﬂer LPJ. Assessment of geothermal resources of the United States – 1978.
USGS; 1979. Circular 790: 163 p.
[9] Hochstein MP. Assessment and modelling of geothermal reservoirs (small
utilization schemes). Geothermics 1988;17(1):15–49.
[10] Haenel R, Rybach L, Stegena L. Fundamentals of geothermics. In: Haenel R,
Rybach L, Stegena LA, editors. Handbook of Terrestial Heat Flow Density
Determination. Dordrecht NL: Kluwer Academic; 1988. p. 9–57.
[11] Nicholson K. Geothermal Fluids. Berlin: Springer Verlag; 1993.
[12] Benderitter Y, Cormy G. Possible approach to the geothermal research and
relative cost estimate. In: Dickson MH, Fanelli M, editors. Small Geothermal
Resources. Rome, Italy: UNITAR/UNDP Centre for Small Energy Resources;
1990. p. 61–71.
[13] Sanyal SK. Classiﬁcation of Geothermal systems – a possible scheme. In:
Proceedings 30th Workshop on geothermal reservoir engineering. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University; January 31–February 2, 2005. SGP-TR-176.
[14] Lee KC. Classiﬁcation of geothermal resources by exergy. Geothermics
2001;30:431–42.
[15] Kestin J. Available work in geothermal energy. In: Kestin J, DiPippo R, Khalifa HE,
Ryley DJ, editors. Source book on the production of electricity from geothermal
energy. Washington DC: US Government Printing Ofﬁce; 1980. p. 227–75.
[16] Williams CF, Reed MJ, Anderson AF. Updating the classiﬁcation of geothermal
resources. In: Proceedings 36th workshop on geothermal reservoir engineering.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University; January 31–February 2, 2011. SGP-TR-191.
[17] Neuendorf KE, Mehl Jr. JP, Jackson JA. Glossary of Geology. 5th ed.. Alexandria
VA: American Geosciences Institute; 2005.
[18] Phillips BR, Ziagos J, Thorsteinsson H, Hass E. A roadmap for strategic
development of geothermal exploration technologies. In: Proceedings of
38th workshop on geothermal reservoir engineering. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University; Feburary 11–13, 2013. SGP-TR-198.
[19] King D, Metcalfe E. Rift Zones as a Case Study for Advancing Geothermal
Occurrence Models. Proceedings, 38th Workshop on Geothermal Reservoir
Engineering. Stanford University, Stanford, CA: Feb 11–13, 2013; SGP-TR-198.
[20] Mufﬂer LJP. Tectonic and hydrologic control of the nature and distribution of
geothermal resources. In: Proceedings of the 2nd U.N. Symposium of the
development and use of geothermal resources. 1976. 1 p. 499–507.
[21] Heicken G. Geology of geothermal systems. In: Edwards LM, Chilingar GV,
Rieke HH, Fertl WH, editors. Handbook of Geothermal Energy. Houston: Gulf
Publishing Company; 1982. p. 177–217.
[22] Faulds JE, Coolbaugh M, Bouchot V, Moeck I, Oguz K. Characterizing
structural controls of geothermal reservoirs in the basin and range, USA,
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
880

and
western
Turkey:
developing
successful
exploration
strategies
in
extended terranes. In: Proceedings of the WGC. Bali, Indonesia; 2010. April
25–30; paper 1163: 11 p.
[23] Cacace M, Blöcher G, Watanabe N, Moeck I, Börsing N, Kolditz O, et al.
Modelling of fractured carbonate reservoirs: Outline of a novel technique via
a case study from the Molasse Basin, southern Bavaria (Germany). Environ
Earth Sci Epub 2013;21:18.
[24] Barton CA, Zoback MD, Moos D. Fluid ﬂow along potentially active faults in
crystalline rock. Geology 1995;23(8):683–6.
[25] Moeck I, Kwiatek G, Zimmermann G. Slip tendency, fault reactivation
potential and induced seismicity in a deep geothermal reservoir. J Struc
Geol 2009;31:1174–82.
[26] Moeck I, Backers T. Fault reactivation potential as critical factor during
reservoir stimulation. First Break 2011;29:67–74.
[27] Moeck I, Schandelmeier H, Holl HG. The stress regime in Rotliegend
reservoir of the Northeast German Basin. Int J Earth Sci 2009;98(7):
1643–54.
[28] Gianelli G, Grassi S. Water-rock interaction in the active geothermal system
of Panetelleria, Italy. Chem Geol 2001;181(1–4):113–30.
[29] Pruess K, Bodvarsson GS. Thermal effects of reinjection in geothermal
reservoirs with majors vertical fractures. In: Proceedings of the SPE 58th
annual technical conference. San Francisco, CA; 1983.
[30] Zheng K, Dong Y. The possible role of geothermal energy to the Chinese
energy development. In: Proceedings of the 8th Asian geothermal sympo-
sium. Hanoi, Vietnam: Vietnam Institute of Geosciences and Mineral
Resources; 2008, December 9–10.
[31] Frisch W, Loeschke J, editors. Plattentektonik. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft; 2003 p. 190.
[32] Bachu S. Synthesis and model of formation-water ﬂow, Alberta Basin,
Canada. AAPG Bull. 1995;79(8):1159–78.
[33] Weides S, Moeck I, Majorowicz J, Grobe M, Palomi D. Geothermal exploration of
Paleozoic formations in Central Alberta. Can J Earth Sci 2012;50(5):519–34.
[34] Nukman M, Moeck I. Structural controls of a geothermal system in the Tarutung
Basin, north central Sumatra. J Asian Earth Sci 2013;74:86–96.
[35] Deon F, Moeck I, Jaya M, Wiegand B, Scheytt T, Putriatni DJ. Preliminary
assessment of the geothermal system in the Tiris volcanic area, East Java,
Indonesia. In: Proceedings of the 74th EAGE conference and exhibition.
Copenhagen, Denmark: EarthDoc EAGE Publications; 2012. June 4–7.
[36] Faulds JE, Bouchot V, Moeck I, Oguz K. Structural controls of geothermal
systems in western Turkey: a preliminary report. Geotherm Resou Counc
Trans 2009;33:375–83.
[37] Hochstein MP, Zheng K, Pasvanoglu S, Vivian-Neal P. Advective (heat sweep)
geothermal systems. In: Proceedings of the 38th workshop on geothermal
reservoir engineering. Stanford, California; Stanford University: 2013Febru-
ary 11–13:SGP-TR-198.
[38] Bertini G, Casini M, Gianelli G, Pandelli E. Geological structure of a long-
living geothermal system, Larderello, Italy. Terra Nova 2006;18:163–9.
[39] McCoy-West A, Milicich S, Robinson T, Bignall G, Harvey CC. Geothermal
resources in the Paciﬁc Islands: The potential of power generation to beneﬁt
indigenous communities. In: Proceedings of the 36th workshop on geother-
mal reservoir engineering. Stanford, California; Stanford University: 2011
January 31–February 2:SGP-TR-191.
[40] Schubert G, Straus JM, Grant MA. A problem posed by vapour-dominated
geothermal systems. Nature 1980;287:423–5.
[41] Tong LT, Ouyang S, Guo TR, Lee CR, Hu KH, Lee CL, et al.
Insight into the
geothermal structure in Chingshui, Ilan, Taiwan. Terr Atmos Ocean Sci
2008;19(4):413–24.
[42] Haraldsson IG. 2013 Geothermal activity in south America: Bolivia, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru. In: Proceedings of the Short course on
conceptual modeling of geothermal systems. Santa Tecla, El Salvador; United
Nations Univeristy Training Programme, UNU-GTP and Lageo: 2013. Febru-
ary 24–March 02. 18 p.
[43] Hochstein MP, Sudarman S. History of geothermal exploration in Indonesia
from 1970 to 2000. Geothermics 2008;37(3):220–6.
[44] Ingebritsen SE, Sorey ML. Vapor-dominated zones within hydrothermal
systems; evolution and natural state. J Geophys Res 1988;93:12635–3655.
[45] Majer EL, Peterson JE. The impact of injection on seismicity at the Geysers,
California geothermal ﬁeld. Int J Rock Mech Min Sci 2007;44:1079–90.
[46] Mufﬂer LJP. Geothermal reservoir assessment. In: Rybach L, Mufﬂer LJP,
editors. Geothermal systems: Principles and case histories. Chichester UK:
John Wiley & Sons; 1981. p. 181–9 (1981).
[47] Fournier RO, Truesdell AH. An empirical Na–K–Cageothermometer for
natural waters. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 1973;37:1255–75.
[48] Giggenbach WF, Gonﬁantini R, Jangi BL, Truesnell AH. Isotopic and chemical
composition of Partibati Valley geothermal discharges NW Himalaya, India.
Geothermics 1983;12:199–222.
[49] Reed MJ. Assessment of low-temperature geothermal resources of the United
States-1982. USGS Circular 1983;892:73.
[50] Flynn G, Ghusn Jr. G. Geologic and hydrogeologic research in the Moana
geothermal system, Washoe County, Nevada. Geotherm Resou Counc Trans
1983;7:417–21.
[51] Nicholson K. Geothermal ﬂuids: Chemistry and exploration techniques.
Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer; 1993; 263.
[52] Faulds JE, Moeck I, Drakos P, Zemach E. Structural assessment and 3D
geological modeling of the Brady's Geothermal Area, Churchill County,
(Nevada, USA). In: Proceedings of the 35th Workshop on geothermal
reservoir engineering. Stanford, California; Stanford University: 2010. Feb-
ruary 1–3:SGP-TR-188.
[53] Faulds JE, Coolbaugh MF, Benoit D, Oppliger G, Perkins M, Moeck I, et al.
Structural controls of geothermal activity in the Northern Hot Springs Moun-
tains, Western Nevada: The Tale of three geothermal systems (Brady's, Desert
Peak, and Desert Queen). Geothermal Res Council Trans 2010;34:675–84.
[54] Jolie E, Faulds J, Moeck I. The development of a 3D structural geological
model a spart of the geothermal exploration strategy – A case study from the
Brady's geothermal system, Nevada, USA. In: Proceedings of the 37th
Workshop on geothermal reservoir engineering. Stanford, CA; Stanford
University: 2012 January 30–February 1:SGP-TR-194.
[55] Sullivan WA, Snoke AW. Comparative anatomy of core-complex develop-
ment in the northeastern Great Basin, USA. Rocky Mt Geol 2007;42(1):1–29.
[56] McKenna JR, Blackwell D. Numerical modeling of transient Basin and range
extensional geothermal systems. Geothermics 2004;33:457–76.
[57] Faulds JE, Coolbaugh M, Blewitt G, Henry CD. Why is Nevada in hot water?
Structural controls and tectonic model of geothermal systems in the north-
western Great Basin Geothrm Resour Counc Trans 2004;28:649–54.
[58] Blewitt G, Coolbaugh M, Sawatzky D, Holt W, Davis J, Bennett R. Targeting of
potential geothermal resources in the Great Basin from regional to basin-
scale relationships between geodetic strain and geological structures.
Geothrm Resour Counc Trans 2003;27:3–7.
[59] Louie JN. Crustal thickness and seismic velocity in the Great Basin. Presentation
at the Great Basin Geothermal Workshop. Reno: University of Nevada; 2004; 5.
[60] Richards M, Blackwell D. A difﬁcult search, Why Basin and Range systems are
hard to ﬁnd. Geother Resour Counc Bull 2002;31(4):143–6.
[61] Lutz SJ, Moore JN, Blamey NJF, Norman DI. Fluid-inclusion gas chemistry of
the Dixie Valley (NV) geothermal system. In: Proceedings of the 27th
Workshop on geothermal reservoir engineering. Stanford, CA; Stanford
University: 2002 January 28–30.
[62] Nimz G, Janik C, Goff F, Dunlap C, Huebner M, Counce D. Regional hydrology
of the Dixie Valley geothermal ﬁeld, Nevada; Preliminary interpretations of
chemical and isotopic data. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Tech
Inf Dep Digital Library; 1999. [cited 2012 Dec][11 p]. Available from: 〈http://
www.llnl.gov./tid/Library.html〉.
[63] Moeck I, Hinz N, Faulds J, Bell J, Kell-Hills A, Louie J. 3D geological mapping as
new method in geothermal exploration: a case study from Central Nevada.
Geothem Resour Counc Trans 2010;34:807–12.
[64] Bruhn D, Manzella A, Vuataz F, Faulds J, Moeck I, Erbas K. Exploration
methods. In: Huenges E, editor. Geothermal Energy Systems, 2010. Wein-
heim, Germany: Wiley-VCH publisher; 2010. p. 37–111.
[65] Cumming W. Geothermal resource conceptual models using surface exploration
data. In: Proceedings of the 34th Workshop on geothermal reservoir engineering.
Stanford, CA; Stanford University: 2009. February 9–11:SGP-TR-187.
[66] Zehner R, Coolbaugh M, Shevenell L. Preliminary geothermal potential map
and exploration activity in Nevada. Nevada Bureau of Mines and Geology.
Reno NV; 2010: Open File Report 09–10.
[67] Coolbaugh M, Taranik JV, Raines GL, Shevenell LA, Sawatzky D, Bedell R, et al.
A geothermal GIS for Nevada: deﬁning regional controls and favorable
exploration terrains for extensional geothermal systems. Geotherm Resou
Counc Trans 2002;26:485–90.
[68] Opplinger G, Coolbaugh M, Shevenell L. Improved visualization of satellite
radar InSAR observed structural controls at producing geothermal ﬁelds
using modeled horizontal surface displacements. Geotherm Resou Counc
Trans 2006;30:927–30.
[69] Genter A, Traineau H, Bourgine B, Ledesert B, Genter, S. 2000. Over 10 years
of geological investigations within the European Soultz HDR project, France.
In: Iglesias E, Blackwell D, Hunt T, Lund J, Tamanyu S, Kimbara K. editors.
Proceedings of the WGC. Kyushu Tohoku, Japan; 2000. p. 3703–12.
[70] Kohl T, Speck R. Electricity production by geothermal hybrid-plants in low-
enthalpy areas. In: Proceedings of the 29th workshop on geothermal
reservoir engineering. Stanford, CA; Stanford University: 2004. January 26–
28:SGP-TR-175.
[71] Genter A, Cuenot N, Goerke X, Melchert B, Sanjuan B, Scheiber J. Status of the
Soultz geothermal project during exploitation between 2010 and 2012. In:
Proceedings of the 37th workshop on geothermal reservoir engineering.
Stanford, California; Stanford University: 2012 January 30–February 2:SGP-
TR-194, 12 p.
[72] Majorowicz J, Unsworth M, Babadagli T, Chako T, Gray A, Grobe M., et al.
Feasibility of using engineered geothermal systems for heat production in oil
sands processing in Northern Alberta. In: Proceedings of the AAPG/SPE/SEG
hedberg research conference enhanced geothermal systems. Napa, USA:
2011 14–18 March.
[73] Barton CA, Zoback MD, Burns KL. In-situ stress orientation and magnitude at
the Fenton Hill geothermal site, New Mexico, determined from wellbore
breakouts. Geophys Res Lett 1988;15(5):467–70.
[74] Parker R. The Rosemanowes HDR project 1983-1991. Geothermics 1999;28
(4–5):603–15.
[75] Valley B, Evans KF.. Stress heterogeneity in the granite of the Soultz EGS
reservoir inferred form analysis of wellbore failure. In: Proceedings of the
WGC. Bali, Indonesia: 2010. April 25–29.
[76] Wyborn D. Update of development of the geothermal ﬁeld in the granite at
Innamincka, South Australia. In: Proceedings of the WGC. Bali, Indonesia:
2010. April 25–29.
[77] Grasby SE, Hutcheon I. Controls on the distribution of thermal springs in the
southern Canadian Cordillera. Can J Earth Sci 2001;38:427–40.
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
881

[78] Allen DM, Grasby SE, Voormeij DA. Determining the circulation depth of
thermal springs in the southern Rocky Mountain Trench, south-eastern
British Columbia, Canada using geothermometry and borehole temperature
logs. Hydrogeol J 2006;14:159–72.
[79] Zimmermann G, Reinicke A, Blöcher G, Milsch H, Gehrke D, Holl HG., et al.
Well path design and stimulation treatments at the geothermal research
well GtGrSk4/05 in Groß Schönebeck. In: Proceedings of the 32nd workshop
on geothermal reservoir engineering. Stanford, CA; Stanford University:
2007. January 22–24:SGP-TR-183.
[80] Zimmermann G, Reinicke A, Brandt W, Blöcher G, Milsch H, Holl HG, et al.
Results of stimulation treatments at the geothermal research wells in
GroßSchönebeck/Germany. In:
Proceedings of
the 33rd workshop
on
geothermal reservoir engineering. Stanford, CA; Stanford University: 2008
January 28–30:SGP-TR-185.
[81] Majorowicz JA, Garven G, Jessop A, Jessop C. Present heat ﬂow along a proﬁle
across the Western Canada Sedimentary Basin: the extent of hydrodynamic
inﬂuence. In: Förster A, Merriam DF, editors. Geothermics in Basin Analysis.
Springer; 1999. p. 61–79.
[82] Toth J. Gravitational systems of groundwater ﬂow – Theory, evaluation,
utilization. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 2009; 297.
[83] Craw D, Koons PO, Zeitler PK, Kidd SF. Fluid evolution and thermal structure
in the rapidly exhuming gneiss complex of Namche Barwa-GyalaPeri, eastern
Himalayan syntaxis. J Methamorph Geol 2005;23:829–45.
[84] Majorowicz J, Wybraniec S. New terrestrial heat ﬂow map of Europe after
regional paleoclimatic correction application. Int J Earth Sci (GeolRundsch)
2011;100:881–7.
[85] Salley RC. Applied sedimentology. 2nd ed.. San Diego (CA), London (UK),
Burlington (MA): Academic Press; 2000; 523.
[86] Hartmann DJ, Beaumont EA. Predicting reservoir system quality and perfor-
mance. In: Beaumont EA, Foster NH, editors. Exploring for oil and gas traps,
Treatise of petroleum geology, handbook of petroleum geology. Tusla: AAPG
publishing; 2000. p. 1150.
[87] Wolfgramm M, Obst K, Brandes J, Koch R, Raubbach K, Thorwart K..
Produktivitaetsprognosen geothermischer Aquifere in Deutschland. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Der Geothermiekongress Conference. Bochum Germany;
2009. 17–19.
[88] Tenzer H, Park CH, Kolditz O, McDermott CI. Application of the geomecha-
nicalfacies approach and comparison of exploration and evaluation methods
used at Soultz-sous-Forets (France) and Spa Urach (Germany) geothermal
sites. Environ Earth Sci 2010;61(4):853–80.
[89] Klapperer S, Moeck I, Norden B. Regional 3D geological modeling and stress
ﬁeld analysis at the CO2 storage site of Ketzin, Germany. Geotherm Resou
Counc Trans 2011;35:419–23.
[90] Noack V, Cherubini Y, Scheck-Wenderoth M, Lewerenz B, Höding T, Simon
A, et al. Assessment of the present-day thermal ﬁeld (NE German Basin) –
Inferences from 3D modeling. Chemie der Erde – Geochemistry 2010;70
(Suppl. 3):S47–62.
[91] Norden B, Förster A. Thermal conductivity and radiogenic heat production of
sedimentary and magmatic rocks in the Northeast German Basin. AAPG Bull
2006;90(6):939–62.
[92] Cuenot N, Faucher JP, Fritsch D, Genter A, Szablinski D. The European EGS
project at Soultz-sous-Forets: from extensive exploration to power produc-
tion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE power and energy society general meeting.
Pittsburg: 2008 Jul 20–24: PES, paper 4596680.
[93] Haring M. Deep heat mining: Development of cogeneration power plant
from an enhanced geothermal system in Basel. Geotherm Resou Counc Trans
2004;2004(28):219–22.
[94] Moeck I. Iterative development of stress models for deep geothermal
reservoirs. In: Proceedings of the 74th EGAE conference and exhibition –
Conference. EarthDoc EAGE Publications: Copenhagen, Denmark; 2012 June
4–7; 2012. 5 p.
[95] Bauer K, Munoz G, Moeck I. Pattern recognition and lithological interpreta-
tion of collocated seismic and magnetotelluric models using self-organized
maps. Geophys J Int 2012;189(2):984–98.
[96] Munoz
G,
Bauer
K,
Moeck
I,
Schulze
A,
Ritter
O.
Exploring
the
Großschönebeck (Germany) geothermal site using statistical joint interpre-
tation of magnetotelluric and seismic tomography models. Geothermics
2010;39(1):35–45.
[97] Fritzer T. Bayerischer Geothermieatlas - hydrothermale Energiegewinnung:
Technik, wirtschaftliche Aspekte, Risiken, hydrothermale Grundwasserleiter
in Bayern, Untergrundtemperaturen in Bayern. Munich: Bayer. Staatsminister-
ium fuer Wirtschaft Infrastruktur Verkehr und Technologie; 2010 January 1. 96
p. German.
[98] Schellschmidt R, Sanner B, Pester S, Schulz R. Geothermal energy use in Germany.
In: Proceedings of the WGC. Bali, Indonesia; 2010 April 25–29:paper 0152, 19 p.
[99] Suryadarma, Dwikorianto T, Zuhro A. Lessons learned from Kamojang
geothermal steam ﬁeld management: from beginning until now. In: Pro-
ceedings of the WGC. Antalya/Turkey; 2005. April 24–29: paper 0509, 6 p.
[100] Bignall G, Rae A, Rosenberg M. Rationale for targeting fault versus formation-
hosted permeability in high-temperature geothermal systems of the Taupo
volcanic zone, New Zealand. In: Proceedings of the WGC. Bali, Indonesia;
2010 April 25–29: paper 1148, 7 p.
[101] Sigrudsson O. The Reykjanes Seawater geothermal system – Its exploitation
under regulatory constraints. In: Proceedings WGC. Bali, Indonesia; 2010
April 25–29:paper 2413, 7 p.
[102] Harvey C, Harvey M. The prospectivity of hotspot volcanic islands for
geothermal exploration. In: Proceedings WGC. Bali, Indonesia; 2010 April
25–29:paper 1182, 6 p.
[103] Bertani R, Bertini G, Cappetti G, Fiordelisi A, Marocco BM. An update of the
larderello-travale/radicondoli deep geothermal system. In: Proceedings WGC.
Antalya/Turkey; 2005 April 24–29:paper 0936, 6 p.
[104 Guillou-Frottier L, Carre C, Bourgine B, Bouchot V, Genter A. Hydrothermal
convection beneath an inclined basement-sediment interface: application to
the Rhine graben and its Soultz-sous-Forets temperature anomaly. In:
Proceedings of the AGU conference. San Francisco, CA; 2012 December 3–5.
Poster V12C-2856.
[105] Surdam RC, Dunn TL, MacGowan DB, Heasler HP. In: Coalson EB, Kaplan SS,
Keighin CW, Oglesby LA, Robinson JW, editors. Conceptual models for
prediction of porosity evolution with an example from the Frontier Sand-
stone, Big-Horn basin, Wyoming. Sandstone Reservoirs: Rocky Mountain
Association of Geologists; 1989. p. 7–21.
[106] Trautwein U, Huenges E. Poroelastic behavior of physical properties in
Rotliegend sandstones under uniaxial strain. Int J Rock Mech Min Sci
2005;42:924–32.
[107] Zimmermann G, Moeck I, Bloecher G. Cyclic waterfrac stimulation to develop
an Enhanced Geothermal System (EGS) – Conceptual design and experi-
mental results. Geothermics 2010;39(1):59–69.
[108] Norden B, Foerster A, Vu-Hoang D, Marcelis F, Springer N, le Nir I. Lithological
and petrophysical core-log interpretation in CO2SINK, the European CO2
onshore research storage and veriﬁcation project. SPE Reserv. Eval Eng
2010;13(2):179–92.
[109] Birner J, Fritzer T, Jodocy M, Schneider M, Stober I. Aufbau eines geother-
mischen informationssystems fuer Deutschland. Hannover: LIAG report;
2009. Archive no. 0128452, [Chapter Molassebecken]. German.
[110] Hänel R, Kleefeldt M, Koppe I. Geothermisches Energiepotenzial. Pilotstudie:
Abschätzung der geothermischen Energievorräte an ausgewählten Beispielen
in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland (Abschlussbericht). Hannover: Ber-
ichtNLfB; 1984. Archiv-nr. 96 276, Band I–IV, Hannover. German.
[111] Kosack C, Vogt C, Marquart G, Clauser C, Rath V. Stochastic permeability
estimation for the Soultz-Sous-Forets EGS reservoir. In: Prodceedings of the
36th workshop on geothermal reservoir engineering. Stanford, CA; Stanford
University: 2011 January 31 – February 2.
I.S. Moeck / Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 37 (2014) 867–882
882
