Geothermal Drilling and Well Design
5
This chapter begins by describing the construction of geothermal wells. The drilling
process and equipment follow, but this is under continuous development, and the
techniques described have been chosen to illustrate the issues rather than the latest
practice. A section on well design begins with the basics of stress analysis and
theories of failure and then describes casing selection and particular modes of
failure to be designed against, in both the construction of the well and its later
operation. Wellhead equipment is described. The units in this chapter are mixed,
some SI and some imperial, because the materials required for drilling are
manufactured in imperial units.
5.1   Introduction
Geothermal wells must be designed and constructed in an engineering sense—they
are not simply holes in the ground but are made up of lengths of steel tubing,
referred to as casing, cemented into the ground with a valve on the top. Their
function is to connect the resource to the surface in such a way that discharge from
the well is controllable at all times, and well design follows tight specifications.
Once it begins, drilling incurs a high cost over a short period of time and calls for
careful management and an experienced drilling team. Difficult decisions often
have to be made on the spot if problems arise. Although well design, drilling
equipment and the procedures to be followed during drilling and completion of a
well are all soundly based on engineering principles, the practice is almost an art
rather than a science. The materials and conditions that the drill will encounter have
a reasonably high degree of uncertainty, the components are often highly stressed
and the whole activity is “heavyweight”—there is the potential for things to go
badly wrong without a careful and experienced manager (drilling superintendent).
High-temperature geothermal wells range in depth from a few hundred metres to
about 4,000 m, wells at Kakkonda, Japan, being the prime examples with
A. Watson,Geothermal Engineering: Fundamentals and Applications,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4614-8569-8_5,
#
Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013
77

temperatures of over 350

C. Petroleum wells may be much deeper, and the deepest
well drilled of any type has a depth of 12,000 m. Formation temperature is a major
limitation for geothermal wells due to its effect on the strength of the drilling
equipment. Wells are drilled to quite specific targets set by geologists, either faults,
formations or an intrusion or pluton, and often they are not straight and vertical but
curved. It is possible to drill them geometrically vertical to within a few metres, but
sometimes wells are deliberately deviated by hundreds of metres to reach targets
which cannot be reached from immediately above. Drilling is an expensive activity,
and deviated wells are more expensive than vertical ones to reach the same target
depth, so the final choice of well track is the result of optimisation of several factors,
including pipeline routes and separator locations for delivery and processing of the
discharge or delivery of separated water in the case of injection wells.
A common diameter for the inner casing of a well to supply a power station is
9 5/8
00
(0.244 m), but even if it had a diameter of 20
00
, as some modern wells have,
even a 500 m deep well would be a very slender structure. This affects both its
performance as a duct for fluid flow and the care required during construction. Slender
tubes bend easily, and like bridges, wells are at most risk of failure during their
construction. The drilling process follows a detailed plan and takes place at a prepared
site; it is a source of environmental impact, and site requirements will be better
understood if well construction and the actual drilling process are explained first.
5.2   Well Construction
Figure5.1is the design for a 2,000 m deep production well.
The upper 800 m is made up of three concentric casings, referred to as casing
strings when all the separate 10 m lengths from which they are formed are screwed
together, namely:
•  A 90 m length of casing 20
00
in diameter cemented into a hole 92 m deep and 26
00
diameter, called the surface casing.
•  A 250 m length of 13 3/8
00
casing cemented into a hole 252 m deep and 17 ½
00
diameter. This is called the anchor casing because when the well is finished, it
will carry the wellhead valve.
•  An 800 m length of 9 5/8
00
casing cemented into a hole 802 m deep and 12 ¼
00
diameter. This is called the production casing because the produced fluid will
flow through it.
The production casing seals off the well from the formations through which it is
drilled, preventing cross-contamination of produced fluids and shallow groundwa-
ter. Sometimes a short length, say 30 m, of “conductor” casing is placed first, where
an unsupported hole in the upper levels of the ground would collapse before 90 m
depth had been reached. In some circumstances, more casings might be needed to
drill to 2,000 m, for example, an intermediate casing between anchor and produc-
tion; this is dependent on the vertical temperature profile, as explained later.
The lower part of the well is an 8 1/2
00
diameter hole into which is placed a 7 5/8
00
diameter steel tube perforated by a large number of axially orientated rectangular
785  Geothermal Drilling and Well Design

slots which, in contrast to the production casing, are there to allow fluids to flow
easily from the penetrated formations into the well and up to the wellhead.
Although not specified on the diagram, the slotted liner either stands on the bottom
of the hole so that it protrudes a few metres into the production casing or is attached
to the bottom of the production casing by a special fitting and hangs from it, ending
just above the bottom of the hole. The drawing specifies the weight/ft of all the
casings, which are made up of standard 10 m lengths screwed together. For
example, the slotted liner has a weight of 26.4 lb/ft, giving it a total weight of
104 tonnes. This is important information, since lifting equipment with this capac-
ity must be used to put it in place. If it is suspended from the production casing
when finally in position, it will produce a tensile force that the production casing
must be capable of withstanding. These are all aspects of the well design process, as
are the numbers of casings and the depths of each.
The casings are cemented into the ground, and where they pass through an
already cemented casing, the annular gap is filled with cement. Once the hole is
drilled for the first (shallowest) length of casing, the casing is gradually assembled
Fig. 5.1An example
of a geothermal well
5.2  Well Construction79

in the hole in 10 m lengths. The piece which will be lowest in the well is first fitted
with a “shoe”, to protect the bottom edge, and a non-return valve. It is lowered into
the well, held while the next piece is screwed to it, the pair are lowered and held
and the process repeated until the required length is assembled and in place,
hanging in the hole. A volume of cement slightly greater than the volume of the
annulus formed by the outer surface of the tube and the surrounding hole is pumped
into the tube, and a rubber piston inserted after it. Water is pumped into the tube
behind the piston, driving it downwards and causing the cement to flow upwards to
fill the annulus, eventually overflowing at the surface. Once the overflow has been
seen, the annulus is assumed to be full of cement, which is allowed time to set. After
the cement has set, a flange is welded to the top of the casing, a drilling wellhead
fitted and a collection of blowout preventers and valves, described later. The top of
this casing and all successive ones is a few metres higher than it will be eventually,
to carry the drilling fluids to a high level; when it has been cemented and drilling is
taking place through a smaller diameter cemented casing, it can be cut down to its
final height above surface. To return to the process, drilling resumes after the first
casing is set in place, extending the well to 252 m below the surface with a hole of
17 1/2
00
diameter. The rubber piston, non-return valve and any cement remaining
inside the casing are drilled through.
The last cemented casing stands a few metres above ground level so that the
returning drilling fluid is lifted to a level from which it can flow to screens and
coolers. In New Zealand, geothermal wellheads stand in concrete cellars, which act
as containment for drilling fluid spills during drilling and make operational well-
head maintenance easier, although this is not a universal procedure. In their final
form, the well casings terminate at cellar floor level, the extra length required for
drilling wellheads being cut off as construction proceeds. The anchor casing is an
exception, as it is left standing above the cellar floor and carries the casing head
flange (CHF) to which is attached the permanent main shut-off valve (the “master
valve”) and the wellhead assembly. Any pressure within the well produces forces
tending to lift the anchor casing out of the ground when the valves are shut, hence
its name. Once the well is completed, the CHF becomes the datum for depth
measurements in the well. Throughout the life of a well, the CHF moves relative
to the ground around it due to thermal expansion according to the temperature
distribution in the well. The movement is of order 10–100 mm, which, although
important enough to be taken into account in designing the pipeline attached to a
wellhead, is insignificant for well depth measurements.
While a production casing diameter of 9 5/8
00
as described in this example is
perhaps the most commonly used for power production, larger or smaller diameters
are sometimes specified. For a shallow formation producing low-pressure steam,
the extra cost of a larger diameter casing might be justified by extra electricity
generation as a result of smaller pressure drop in the production casing. Smaller
diameter and hence lighter weight casings, typically 4
00
, might be the only way of
drilling a well in a remote location, if access is restricted to only a small truck
mounted rig, and this is also the approach used to drill geothermal wells for
supplying hot water to domestic and light commercial properties in many places.
805  Geothermal Drilling and Well Design

5.3   The Drilling Process
5.3.1  Drilling a Hole
Holes are drilled into homogenous materials such as metal by a cutting action; a
workshop drill bit for metal has two edges that cut as the bit rotates and two spiral slots
along its length to guide the cuttings out of the hole. Without this escape route for the
cuttings, the bit cannot penetrate. Rock is rarely homogenous and is brittle, i.e. strong
in compression and weak in tension. It cannot be cut by the type of drill bit just
described. Instead a rock bit makes progress by crushing, which is achieved by fitting
the end of the bit with toothed conical rollers that follow a horizontal circular path as
the bit is rotated—for pictures and a history, see ASME [2012]. The drill bit fits on the
end of a steel tube typically 10 m long, which has threaded ends so that more tubes can
be added to allow the drill to reach greater depths. Consistent with the crushing action,
the steel tubes immediately adjacent to the bit are heavier than normal and are called
drill collars; they are selected to give the proper weight on the bit for the rock type
being drilled. The normal drill pipe is added in 10 m lengths as the well progresses.
The rock cuttings are in the form of fine gravel and sand and are flushed to the
surface by the flow of a dense, viscous drilling fluid which is pumped down to
the bit through the drill string, the name given to the connected steel tubes carrying
the bit. Cuttings must be cleared from the hole if the drill is to make progress,
preferably back to the surface, although as will be seen later, it is possible for them
to be pushed into the formation. The drilling fluid emerges from the bit through
nozzles as a set of powerful jets which pick up the cuttings and carry them back to
the surface in the annular gap between the drill string and the hole. The cuttings
sometimes fail to lift completely and become trapped, preventing the drill bit from
turning; in the extreme, the drill string may break by twisting off. Retrieving broken
equipment from a well is known as “fishing”, a frustrating activity by its very nature
and because of the expense of having the rig and crew busy but not making
progress. Massei and Bianchi [1995] have reported on non-destructive testing of
drill string components to avoid failures in service. The drilling fluid is usually a
mixture of water and bentonite clay with minor additives, which has the appearance
of a black slurry or thin mud and by virtue of its density and viscosity is capable of
lifting the cuttings. At the surface, the cuttings are sieved out, and the cleaned mud
is continuously recirculated—it must also be cooled when the well is penetrating
hot formations. The cuttings are collected and inspected by the rig geologist, who is
able to map the stratigraphy of the well, i.e. the formations through which the bit
passes, and the depths of their interfaces.
5.3.2  The Drilling Rig
Geothermal wells are drilled using a rotary drilling rig of the type developed for
petroleum drilling; a rotary rig is one in which the bit is rotated about its axis.
The first oil wells were drilled by a “percussion” method in which the bit was
5.3  The Drilling Process81

suspended by a flexible cable and repeatedly lifted and dropped on the bottom of the
hole, so that it chiselled its way downwards by virtue of its large mass and pointed
end. Such rigs were more sophisticated than might be thought at first sight, for
example, the cable being of twisted steel strands imparted some rotation to the bit,
and this was studied and used to advantage to achieve faster penetration.
The main features of the drilling rig and mud supply system are shown in
Fig.5.2. Part a of the sketches shows details of the rig floor and Part b an overall
view. The swivel can be used as a reference point.
Drilling rigs come in a variety of sizes, from small ones permanently mounted on
a truck to large ones that comprise several truck loads and must be assembled on
site. The drill bit must be rotated, and the traditional surface drive is explained here;
more modern alternatives are discussed later. Drilling rigs are recognisable as a tall
derrick or tower structure often of open framework, and many of the components
have traditional names originating in early oil drilling. The tower is essentially a
crane, which must be capable of lifting the entire length of the drill string when the
bit has reached the designed depth and also the full lengths of each casing string
used in the construction of the well. To remove the bit from the hole, the entire drill
string must be lifted 10 m at a time, held while the top length is unscrewed and
removed, lifted again, and so on, and the drill tower is the means of achieving this.
The weight it can carry dictates the depth and diameter of well that can be drilled,
for example, a rig capable of drilling a well with an open hole diameter of 8 ½
00
, and
Fig. 5.2Showing the main components of a drilling rig
825  Geothermal Drilling and Well Design

a depth of 3,000 m may need to provide a pull of 150 tonnes and be capable of a
power output of up to 1,000 hp. At the top of the tower is the “crown block”, a
multiple pulley block coupled by a wire rope to the “travelling” block to which the
hook is fitted, the number of pulleys providing the mechanical advantage for lifting.
A mechanical advantage of 10:1 means that the tension in the wire rope is 1/10th of
the hook load, an advantage, but the travelling block must rise 10 times the distance
through which the weight is lifted, a disadvantage. Hook loads may be up to 400
tonnes, and the motive power is usually provided by a diesel engine or electric
motor. Lengths of drill pipe or casing stand vertically in racks alongside the tower,
ready for use.
The activity of adding or removing a length of drill pipe or casing takes place on
the drill floor, a platform a few metres above ground level. The entire drill string is
very slender so is weak in torsion, and it twists so that the bottom lags behind the top
as it is rotated. It must transmit torque to the bit, but it must also be free to move
axially while transmitting this torque as the well deepens, and drilling mud must be
continuously pumped through it to lift the cuttings back to the surface. This poses a
mechanical problem at the rig, to which the traditional solution is a horizontal
circular disc known as the rotary table supported on the rig floor by bearings around
its perimeter. It can be rotated about its axis by a diesel or electric motor. In the centre
of the rotary table is a square or hexagonal hole. To the top of the drill string, which is
slightly longer than the depth of the hole, is attached a special length of pipe known
as the “kelly”, which is square or hexagonal in cross section and fits in a matching
bushed hole in the centre of the rotary table. Rotating the rotary table thus rotates the
kelly and hence the entire drill string. The kelly is about 13 m long, deliberately
longer than each drill pipe, and moves downwards as the drilling proceeds. When the
upper end of the kelly approaches the rotary table, the rotation is halted, and the drill
string is lifted until the bottom of the kelly is clear above the top of the rotary table, in
preparation for adding another length of drill pipe. Wedges (slips) are then jammed
into the space between the drill string and the bush, thus supporting the drill string to
prevent it falling back into the hole; the kelly is unscrewed, another 10 m length of
drill pipe added to the top of the drill string and the kelly reconnected. The wedges
are specially shaped to fit this square or hexagonal hole and have teeth so that the
weight of the drill string causes them to grip it tightly. Once all joints have been
tightened up, the drill string is lifted, the wedges are removed, the drill string is
lowered, and bit rotation begins again. The detailed engineering of the rotary table,
bush and Kelly is aimed at reducing wear and tear caused by the necessary repeated
screwing and unscrewing and the use of wedges.
Two alternative ways of rotating the bit are available, both using dedicated
motors which align axially and effectively become part of the drill string. A mud
motor is a positive displacement type which works in the same way as a monopump.
In the latter, a single spiral rotor fits within an apparently matching tube; however, a
cavity exists between the two and moves along the axis as the rotor turns, carrying
any fluid in it from one end of the pump to the other. As a motor, the fluid is
pressurised, enters the motor at one end and drives the rotor as it moves to the low-
pressure exit end. In the form used for drilling, the fluid is drilling mud, and the
motor is fitted into the drill string near to the bit. The other method is called a top
5.3  The Drilling Process83

drive and consists of a motor, electric or hydraulic, which is carried near the crown
block of the rig and drives the drill string, which is suspended from it. This type has
advantages in allowing more than one length of drill pipe to be added or removed
from the string at every lift.
A rotating drill string rubbing against the side of the casing through which it was
operating would damage the casing and could wear a hole through it. This would
make an exchange of fluids between the well and the surroundings more likely; at
the very least, this could cause contamination, but it might also provide a route for
hot geothermal water to reach the surface, where it would break out as steam. Such
breakouts (blowouts) can only be controlled from inside the well, which requires
access to the wellhead, and this might be impossible. Rubbing of the drill string on
the casing can be avoided by keeping the drill string in tension, which is achieved
by making the lower end heavy. Apart from the drill collars already described, the
lower few lengths of drill pipe may be stiffer than the rest, to reduce twisting and
keep the bit in line with the hole.
Figure5.3shows a plot of depth versus drilling time for a geothermal well.
The rate of penetration of the bit is a principal factor affecting the cost of the
completed well, but the speed and efficiency of a drilling team in “running” the drill
string into the hole and pulling it out are important also. Two periods of several days
are identifiable in Fig.5.3, during which the hole stays at the same depth, and these
are when the surface and anchor casing (to 250 m) are cemented and perhaps other
problems arose. Otherwise, progress is made in irregular steps. Bits may need to be
changed, requiring the entire length of the drill string to be removed from the hole,
unscrewed piece by piece and then reassembled with the new bit. When it is
necessary to lift the entire drill string out of the hole or replace it, the kelly is not
needed since no rotational torque is applied. A different lifting device called the
elevator replaces the kelly and swivel between the travelling block and the top of
the drill string. Rather than being a screwed connection to the drill string, the
elevator simply clamps around the small diameter part of the pipe beneath the
joint—the screwed fittings built into each end of each piece of drill pipe have a
larger diameter than the remainder.
Fig. 5.3Representation
of a typical drilling progress
chart for an early
geothermal well
845  Geothermal Drilling and Well Design

In practice, the graph of Fig.5.3is plotted alongside a stratigraphic column
drawn up by the rig geologist and a detailed log of penetration rates and rig
activities such as drilling fluid used, periods of cementing and reasons for making
no progress. This data is used to improve the drilling of the next well in the same
area. The geological stratigraphy found is essential information about the resource,
used in the interpretation of well measurements and in reservoir modelling.
Commercial examples of most types of drilling equipment can be found on
manufacturer’s websites.
5.3.3  Drilling Fluids
It is necessary to introduce fluid into the well while it is being drilled, to pick up the
cuttings and lift them to the surface, to cool the drill string and bit and to reduce
wear and power requirements by acting as a lubricant. The options are drilling mud,
water, aerated mud and air alone, and this list is roughly in order of popularity. A
totally reliable water supply is essential whatever drilling fluid is used, because in
the case of problems, the well may need to be “quenched” by injecting cold water to
prevent discharge. The original mud used for oil well drilling in the USA around the
turn of the century was just that, mud stirred up in a shallow pit dug into soils with
high clay content. Today it is supplied to a required chemical and physical specifi-
cation; the mud particle size ranges from 0.5 to 2μm, and its main constituent is
bentonite. It is mixed with water at the site and held in an open pond adjacent to the
rig. It is pumped from the pond through a flexible hose and “swivel” fitting at
the top of the kelly into the hollow drill string and down to the bit at the bottom of
the hole, as indicated by Fig.5.2. The swivel allows the mud delivery pipe to be
stationary while supplying mud to a rotating shaft—it is essentially a box fitted with
glands through which the shaft passes. A high delivery pressure is required and
positive displacement reciprocating pumps are commonly used. On reaching the
bit, the mud emerges from nozzles in the bit body between the rollers, as explained
above. The nozzles eventually erode and must be replaced.
The mud with the cuttings carried with it rises up the annular space between the
hole and the outside of the drill string and emerges from the casing at wellhead.
It then passes back to the pit via a series of vibrating wire screens known as shale
shakers, which remove the larger cuttings. After the screens, cutting particles up to
about 200μm diameter may remain in suspension, although the greatest proportion
of solids in the mud, over 50 %, will be the particles of mud itself. The screens are
usually followed with a settling tank in which the mud stream moves so slowly that
the larger particles remaining sink to the bottom. Centrifugal separators may then
be used to remove as much as possible of the remaining small cuttings until only
20–30 % of the solids in suspension are cuttings, of less than 30μm. Some mud is
lost during its passage up the well, being forced under pressure into the permeable
rock formations through which the hole is drilled. The pores of the rock may
be smaller than the mud particles, and a layer of mud may seal off the permeable
zones. This may be advantageous if the formation is weak and liable to fall into the
5.3  The Drilling Process85

hole, but it may be disadvantageous in the long term by reducing permeability and
hence the flow of geothermal fluids from the formation into the well.
By the time it reaches the surface, the mud will have increased in temperature
since it was pumped from the pit, depending on the reservoir temperatures reached
and the mechanical work done by the bit. The mud cools and lubricates the moving
parts of the bit, and some of the chemical additives are selected for their lubricating
properties; the mud is cooled at the surface during the filtration process.
An important function of the drilling mud is the prevention of blowouts, by
filling the well with a high-density fluid so that the pressure at any formation can be
exceeded by the hydrostatic pressure in the well. Otherwise, the removal of cuttings
from the hole is the highest priority function that the mud performs, and cake
formation, cooling and lubrication have lower priorities. All of these require that
circulation be maintained, that is, the mud pumped into the well returns to the
surface. In some geothermal resources, circulation is difficult to retain using mud,
because of low pressure in the formations perhaps, and there is a need to reduce the
hydrostatic pressure due to the drilling fluid. In this case, air or aerated mud (foam)
is used, which has the added benefit of making faster progress in deepening the
well, although at the expense of higher cost. Ultimately, if circulation cannot be
retained, then the drilling fluid used is water, which carries the cuttings into the
formation but is otherwise benign. Drilling without circulation is referred to as
drilling blind because there is no information for the rig geologist to know what
type of formation is being drilled through. Before resorting to that, it may be possible
to recover circulation by injecting material to plug the loss zone until after the well is
completed, when the temporary blockage can be removed by allowing the well to
discharge fully open, or by acid injection to chemically remove it.
5.3.4  Drilling Site Requirements
The drilling site must be flat and is typically 50 by 100 m or larger to allow the
transport vehicles easy access and placement of the rig. Fuel oils, drilling mud and
materials and staff temporary accommodation must be provided. Since the site is
likely to have to be cleared of vegetation, storm water drainage is important. Areas
of cleared forest in volcanic soils are prone to slips if they are steep; silt run-off into
natural waterways damages flora and fauna and must be prevented. One or more
pits to contain drilling mud and contaminated waste water are required. If the
ground is already contaminated with geothermal chemical species, then these
may be unlined, so that water can percolate away leaving solid materials which
can be disposed of elsewhere if necessary at the end of drilling or simply buried.
The site will also have to accommodate shale shakers, mud cooling and mixing
equipment and a silencer for the eventual well discharge, although the drilling rig
and equipment will have departed by then. A reliable permanent water supply is
essential, and the New Zealand Code of Practice for deep geothermal wells [1991]
indicates that a 2,000 m deep well such as that shown in Fig.5.1requires a water
865  Geothermal Drilling and Well Design

supply of 2,000–2,500 l/min (of the order of 3,000 tonnes/day). Temporary pumps
with pipelines several kilometres long are not unusual.
Depending on the shallow geology, the site may need to be consolidated by
grouting, that is, drilling a pattern of holes around the well site to a depth of a few
metres and pumping in cement to provide more compressive strength.
5.3.5  Blowout Prevention
Imagine a partly completed well. The anchor casing has been installed and cemented,
and the hole for the production casing is being drilled. Drilling mud or water is being
pumped down the centre of the drill string, and it may be returning through the
annulus between the drill string and the anchor casing, or it may not be returning at
all in which case the annulus will contain some stagnant fluid. Regardless, if the bit
penetrates a geological formation or feature such as a fault and suddenly exposes
these flow paths to a pressure much higher than previously experienced, fluid will
tend to be pushed up and ejected at the wellhead, reducing the hydrostatic pressure at
the bottom of the hole and increasing the discharge. The simple geometry of the
casing and drill string provides an opportunity to mechanically stop this flow. A
valve could be fitted on the passage through the drill string, and a valve with gates
that fit around the drill string could be fitted on the anchor casing. In oil and gas
drilling, the risk from blowout is very high because the fluids are inflammable, and a
valve is fitted with gates to cut the drill string as a last resort. These valves are called
blowout preventers, and sets are available for each casing size to be used for the well,
fitted in turn as the casings are set, as the last line of defence.
5.4   Well Design
The design process is to imagine how the well might fail, select dimensions and
casing depths to avoid risk both in construction and in use, calculate the forces
involved and choose a casing size that will withstand those forces. When subjected
to various forces, a particular component of a structure experiences a stress distri-
bution. Failure of materials is often thought of as resulting from a single stress
which exceeds a certain level, but in general, failure is more often the result of
several stresses in different directions, which combine to cause failure. Failure is a
general term that requires particular definition for each case—in some instances,
failure means breaking a component into two pieces, but in others, allowing the
stress to reach a level at which the material stretches or deflects might constitute a
failure. The design process is usually one of trial and error—the forces are
estimated, material grade and thickness are chosen and the stresses are calculated
and compared to allowable stress limits. The design process had to be examined
early in the development of geothermal drilling. Clearly, it was understood in Italy
in 1912 when Larderello was first brought into use and, for liquid-dominated
resources, was reported on by Dench [1970].
5.4  Well Design87

5.4.1  The Properties, Strength and Failure Criteria of Steel
If a bar of steel of diameter d is pulled in the direction of the axis of the bar with a
force F, it extends linearly in proportion to the force applied. This is called elastic
behaviour. The axial stress in the bar is
σ
a
¼F=πd
2
=4

(5.1)
Strain is defined as the proportional extension of the bar. If the original length of
the bar is L and it extendsδL under the pull, the strainεis
ε¼δL=L(5.2)
A graph ofσ
a
versusεis linear but only up to a certain stress called the yield
stress, after which the bar begins to stretch in a non-linear manner (disproportion-
ately to the force applied). The behaviour is elastic only up to the yield stress, that
is, it returns to its original length when the stress is removed. The linear elastic part
is of slopeσ
a
/ε, known as Young’s modulus, E, which has the value 210
11
Pa for
steel. Carbon steel such as is used for casing reduces in strength as the operating
temperature increases. The strength reduction factor can be applied to whatever
allowable design stress is chosen at room temperature.
Once the yield stress is exceeded, the steel will not return to its original length
but becomes permanently deformed (extended); at stresses above yield, the steel is
said to be plastic, and the next important occurrence is failure, when the ultimate
tensile stress is reached and the steel breaks. For some applications, stresses must
not be allowed to exceed the yield stress. In other applications, failure means
fracturing, so the ultimate tensile stress may be used as the upper limit. Steel is
capable of safely carrying stresses much greater than the yield, and in some
circumstances, where weight of the component or cost is sufficiently important,
the designed stress may be closer to the ultimate. Whatever the circumstances,
some margin of safety is necessary to allow for material property variations and
uncertainty in the method of calculating stress, and it is usual to adopt a safe
working stress lower than the stress defined as the failure criterion. In common
steel structures where weight and cost are not the controlling factors, a safe working
stress of 2/3 of yield is often used, that is, components are designed so that the
calculated stress is no greater than the safe working stress. In some aspects of casing
design, the yield stress is regarded as the safe working stress.
Steel is also elastic in compression, up to the yield stress; however, the yield and
ultimate stresses are always measured by subjecting the material to a tensile test.
The yield stress is difficult to measure exactly, so the stress required to produce a
0.5 % strain (permanent strain of 0.005) may be defined as the yield stress,
sometimes called the 0.5 % proof stress. The American Petroleum Institute
publishes a list of standards for drilling, in which the parameters discussed here
are defined.
885  Geothermal Drilling and Well Design

The majority of real engineering components, including casing, are subjected to
forces in all three directions, and the material fails because of the combined
stresses. In casing, these stresses may be produced by a combination of tension or
compression, bending (which induces tension and compression) and torsion. If the
yield stress is to be used as the failure criterion, then the question is what combina-
tion of stresses on a piece of casing will cause the material to yield?
There are several theories that provide answers, of which two frequently used
ones in general mechanical engineering are the maximum principle stress difference
theory and the von Mises theory. Leaving aside the joints, a casing is a cylinder
with a wall that is thin compared to the diameter. An internally pressurised
cylinder with closed ends is subjected to axial stress due to the pressure acting on
the ends and a hoop stress due to the wall trying to expand under the internal
pressure. These are both tensile stresses, defined as follows:
axial stress¼σ
a
¼P:A=πD:t¼PD=4t(5.3)
where P is the pressure difference between inside and outside, D is cylinder diame-
ter, A is cross-sectional area¼πD
2
/4, t is wall thickness andπDt is an approxima-
tion to the cross-sectional area of the wall, acceptable since the wall is thin.
hoop stress¼σ
h
¼PD=2t(5.4)
The hoop stress is twice the axial, which is why steel pipelines or gas bottles
burst by splitting along the axis rather than at the ends.
A cylinder is best described by cylindrical coordinates,x,randθ, and the hoop
stress acts in theθdirection and the axial in thexdirection. Because the wall is thin,
the stress in the radial direction is zero. Stresses in these three directions are called
the principal stresses and the axes the principal axes. If thex-axis was replaced by
one at an angle to the cylinder axis, the hoop and axial stresses would combine and
result in a tensile stress plus a shear stress along this new axis. Principal axes are the
axes along which the stresses resolve without any shear stress. Whilst the principle
axes are intuitively obvious for thin cylinders, for general three-dimensional stress
problems described by rectangular Cartesian coordinates, they must be deduced.
Adoptingσ
f
as the failure stress and assumingx,y,zCartesian coordinates and
principle stressesσ
1
,σ
2
andσ
3
, the maximum stress difference theory gives
σ
max
σ
min
¼σ
f
(5.5)
whereσ
max
andσ
min
are the maximum and minimum ofσ
1
,σ
2
andσ
3
. For the thin
cylinder, the principle stresses can be allocated as
σ
1
¼σ
h
;σ
2
¼σ
a
andσ
3
¼0(5.6)
so the maximum stress difference is
σ
1
σ
3
¼σ
f
(5.7)
5.4  Well Design89

By this theory, the material fails when the hoop stress equals the failure stress
measured in an axial tensile test,σ
h
¼σ
f
.
The von Mises theory is that the material fails when the following combination
of principle stresses reaches the stress decided as the failure stress:
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
1=2σ
1
σ
2
ðÞ
2
þσ
2
σ
3
ðÞ
2
þσ
3
σ
1
ðÞ
2
nohi
r
¼σ
f
(5.8)
Substituting from Eq. (5.6) again gives
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
1=2σ
h
σ
a
ðÞ
2
þσ
a
2
þσ
h
2
hi
r
¼σ
f
(5.9)
In practice, the forces on the casing can only be estimated, since the real situation
is usually much more complicated than envisaged, and API Bulletin 5C3 [1994]
gives formulae for various failure loads on casing and API 5C2 provides tabulated
values of the failure loads for each casing type. (Note that details of all API
Bulletins can be found on the API website.) These are the result of theory adjusted
by experimentation and experience and should be adhered to, with an understanding
of the theoretical approach used as an aid to thinking.
5.4.2  Failure Due to Instability: Buckling and Collapse
It is possible for the material to fail under loads that should produce stresses much less
than the yield stress, if the shape of the component allows any initial deformation to
magnify without increase in load. This will lead to high bending stresses and failure
unless the load is removed quickly. The best-known example of this is the buckling of
a strut. If the ends of a strut of length L are pin jointed, that is, the ends stay in line but
can rotate as required, there is a level of axial force that will cause any slight initial
departure from perfect straightness to grow. If the load is maintained, the ends of the
strut will move towards each other to produce a large sideways deflection until the
stress caused by bending makes the material fail—schoolboys break rulers this way.
The force that will induce this condition is known as the Euler buckling load and is
π
2
EI/L
2
for the strut just described, whereIis the second moment of area, a parameter
with the dimensions of m
4
dependent on the cross-sectional shape. This type of
buckling is relevant in handling a long length of built-up casing, which may bow if
it comes under axial compression under its own weight and will touch the wall of the
hole in which it is placed (casing or open hole), leading to poor cementing and less
strength in the combined structure than anticipated—see Leaver [1982].
The collapse of a cylinder under external pressure is another form of instability
relevant to drilling. A circular cylinder under external pressure is unstable if the
pressure is high enough and the walls thin enough, because local departures from
the true circle increase under the applied pressure and the cylinder may collapse
before the stresses reach yield.
905  Geothermal Drilling and Well Design

5.4.3  The Properties and Failure of Rock
Rock is an inadequate description of the materials through which a well might be
drilled. In a geothermal resource with volcanic origins, various rock types are
encountered; some are brittle while others will have been altered by the flow of
geothermal fluids and be plastic and easily deformed, a form of clay. The dense
brittle rocks (rhyolite, andesite, diorite and greywacke) are strong in compression
but weak in tension, and fractures arise from stress concentrations due to
imperfections in the microstructure of the rock, minor voids, for example. Geother-
mal areas have been subjected to tectonic stresses which induced faults and hence a
wide range of fracture sizes, so the rock is in a failed state from the outset. Existing
fractures may extend, and new ones form during drilling as a result of pressurising
the hole.
Analogous to hydrostatic pressure, lithostatic pressure is the pressure that a fluid
with the density of rock would experience at depth. Rock is not a fluid, so it does not
transfer pressure equally in all directions—one particular stratum may carry the
formations above it leaving those below at a lower level of stress. Tectonic stresses
may act horizontally. In addition, permeable rocks or those with open connected
fractures will exhibit pore pressure related to the hydrostatic pressure of water in
connected formations. In general, the lithostatic pressure will ensure that any
horizontal fractures remain under a compressive load tending to keep them closed,
although surface roughness may leave gaps through which fluid flow is possible.
5.4.4  The Properties of Casing Steel and Casing Specification
The properties of casing steel must now be considered. Casing is manufactured to
standards and specifications set by the American Petroleum Institute (API), and the
complete specification of the 9 5/8
00
casing shown in the well of Fig.5.1, for
example, might be Grade K-55, 47 lb/ft, R3, buttress casing. API Specification
5A classifies types of steel for casings and sets out strength requirements and
dimensions. Grades J, K and L signify a metallurgical type commonly used for
geothermal wells; the notation “K-55” refers to a minimum tensile strength require-
ment of 55,000 lb/ft
2
, and the remainder of the details refer to the thread type. API
Bulletin 5C2 defines performance properties of casing (as well as tubing and drill
pipe) and shows that there are various wall thicknesses with an outside diameter of
9 5/8
00
and that these are specified in terms of nominal weight per foot, thicker
casing being heavier. The weights per foot for 9 5/8
00
for J, K and L grades range
from 36.0 to 53.5 lbs/ft. Kurata et al. [1995] reviewed the suitability of casing types
for high-temperature geothermal resources. Knowing the weight per foot allows the
total weight of each casing string to be calculated; the casing has to be lifted and
lowered into the hole by the drilling rig, which must have suitable lifting capacity.
The ends of each casing length are threaded so that they can be coupled, and the
coupling design and performance are specified. In short, the materials available to
construct the well are all tightly defined, and the designer’s task is to find out what
5.4  Well Design91

duty the casing has to perform and to specify which particular type is to be used for
each string. Different casing thicknesses (weights) are sometimes necessary in
different parts of the same string.
5.4.5  Selection of Casing Depths
The primary issue in deciding at what depth each casing should be cemented is
protection against blowout—how deep can open hole be drilled? High-pressure
fluid intercepted at depth might be able to communicate with a fracture in the open
hole which will provide a route back to the surface; the consequences are extremely
bad if this happens, as it amounts to an uncontrolled release of resource fluid which
can destroy the rig and continue discharging for years, producing a crater.
The physics of this issue relates to the bpd curve and its matching hydrostatic
pressure distribution and the lithostatic pressure distribution in the area. These are
plotted on Fig.5.4.
The hydrostatic lines and bpd curve will be recognised as Fig.3.7with the axes
reorientated. In addition, a pressure–depth line is shown for lithostatic pressure,
calculated using a rock density of 2,200 kg/m
3
. Assume that the plan is to drill a
well to a depth of 2,000 m. If the ground was saturated with water at saturation
temperature  from  the  surface  downwards,  the  temperature  and  pressure
distributions would be the bpd curve, marked T, and the corresponding hydrostatic
pressure curve on which point A lies. A well drilled to 2,000 m and filled with steam
at the bottom temperature could have a pressure versus depth graph shown by
Fig. 5.4Bpd, saturated
hydrostatic pressure and
lithostatic pressure versus
depth, for a rock density
of 2,200 kg/m
3
925  Geothermal Drilling and Well Design

the line A–B, continuing up to the wellhead at the surface. This is because the
hydrostatic pressure of a column of steam is negligible compared to that of a
column of water. If the production casing of the well ended at depth B (about
650 m) and there was a fracture in the rock at that point, in principle, the pressure at
that fracture would be enough to lift the entire weight of the rock above—the
lithostatic pressure—the fracture could be forced open and steam could find its way
to the surface. This reveals how the casing depths are selected. Drilling to 2,000 m
requires the protection of a cemented casing to a depth B plus a margin of safety.
The next shallower casing depth can be selected by continuing the process; drilling
to depth B could encounter saturated steam conditions at point C, which could
supply high-pressure steam up to the depth D, the dotted line on the graph.
A formalised approach is given in the New Zealand Code of Practice [1991].
Near the surface, the method is unreliable, and experience with adjacent wells is
used to decide on the depth of conductor casing. The NZ Code of Practice for Deep
Drilling [1991] states that most blowouts occur from depths of 150 m or less and
recommends exploratory drilling of small diameter wells if there is any uncertainty.
The completed well will collect all fluid from below the bottom of the produc-
tion casing, referred to as the production casing shoe. Fluids from formations above
this depth are said to be “cased out”. The production casing shoe depth is deter-
mined at the time that the well is designed, but it is possible to adjust the actual
depth slightly according to the temperature found while drilling, and this might be
advantageous if it would block off (case-out) sources of cold water that would
simply reduce the discharge enthalpy of the finished well. However, it is difficult to
determine the formation temperature during drilling because the formations are
cooled by the drilling fluids. Two approaches have been adopted, the technique
known as a static formation temperature test (SFTT) and by measuring the
circulating mud temperatures. The SFTT is a form of the transient pressure testing
of Chap.9—see, for example, Brennand [1984] and a recent paper which provides a
review, Bassam et al. [2010]. The measurement of mud temperatures was examined
by Takahashi et al. [1997]. This issue is particularly important during exploration
drilling, when perhaps only a single well has been scheduled and information about
deeper formations can be totally obscured by failing to case out a cold formation or,
even worse, by casing out the hottest formation in an outflow.
5.5   Summary of Modes of Well Failure
5.5.1  Drilling Operations That Could Cause Failure
The following operations subject the casing to forces which could cause it to fail:
•  Lowering the casing into the hole—the tensile stress in the uppermost length
(nearest the hook) could exceed the yield due to the weight of casing below it.
The uppermost lengths may need to be stronger than the rest.
•  Lowering the casing into a hole which is full of mud—the displaced mud exerts
the hydrostatic pressure appropriate to its depth. Radial pressures inside and
5.5  Summary of Modes of Well Failure93

outside the casing are balanced so long as the inside is open to the mud, but the
pressure on the end (however small a cross section that might appear to be) acts
upwards putting the casing in compression as a strut. The casing string is very
slender and must be stiff enough not to buckle.
•  In deviated wells, the curvature of the bend could raise combined stresses
beyond the yield stress or be at a radius of curvature that the drill collars or
stiffer pipe sections cannot take up. The curvature must be appropriate.
•  Pumping cement could produce high internal pressure or high external pressure
on the casing if the cement is not continuous throughout the casing and annulus.
•  In an effort to reduce the risk of blowout, mud density could be increased to such
a level that its hydrostatic pressure is sufficient to fracture the rock in the open
hole. This is to be avoided. Cementing could also fracture the rock.
5.5.2  Possible Modes of Failure of a Completed Well
Histories of well failures and deterioration have been reported, e.g. Bixley and
Hattersly [1983], Zarrouk [2004] and Southon [2005]. Among the most commonly
recognised are the following:
•  Bursting due to the expansion of a pocket of water trapped in the cement
between the production and anchor casing. Sometimes the cement annulus
between the hole and the casing or between the casings is discontinuous, and
there is a pocket of water left in the space. This water is cold when it forms in the
wet cement, and it becomes trapped when the cement hardens. It expands
thermally when the well is first discharged and may produce a high enough
pressure to deform or burst the production casing inwards, leaving a flow
restriction or jagged edges on which instrument lines could catch. It can be
repaired by cementing a patch in the form of a length of smaller diameter casing,
but this reduces the cross-sectional area and hence the well discharge.
•  Failure of the uppermost length of anchor casing that carries high internal
pressure at high temperature when the well is shut, exacerbated by corrosion at
ground level (discussed in Sect.5.6).
•  Failure by internal corrosion if very acidic fluids with dissolved magmatic gases
are intersected by the well.
•  Failure of one or more casings as a result of compaction of one of the strata open
to the well. If a formation compacts and the well casings remain firmly cemented
in all other formations, shallow and deep, then the casings at the compacting
formation come under a compressive load and may fail, depending on the
amount of compaction.
5.5.3  Inspection Methods
However unreasonably, given the usually corrosive environment in which they
operate and the severe temperature variations to which they are exposed, geother-
mal wells are expected to have an indefinite life. However, the New Zealand
945  Geothermal Drilling and Well Design

Standard [1991] gives a prescription for permanent abandonment when the time
comes. Various inspection techniques have been developed to measure the condi-
tion of the production casing. Stevens [2000] describes an instrument capable of
being lowered into a hot, recently discharged well to give an immediate surface
output of the measurements. An eddy current principle is used to measure wall
thickness, an electronic calliper to measure diameter and a surface roughness
indicator. Lejano et al. [2010] adopted the approach of measuring the internal
diameter of a sample of 10 wells in the Leyte field, Philippines, using a 60-finger
mechanical calliper tool. The remaining wall thickness was deduced from the
measurements, which were detailed enough to show surface roughness and pitting.
Thus a bursting pressure could be established for any particular well measured
which provided a “not to be exceeded” pressure for the guidance of future
operations on that well.
5.6   The Completed Wellhead
The completed well must be capable of being safely closed against the pressure
exerted by the reservoir fluids. The wellhead pressure varies with time after closure
of the wellhead valve; the forces on the wellhead are carried by the anchor casing
and the wellhead components. The anchor casing above ground level is unlike the
buried part because it is an unsupported pipe (the buried part is supported by an
outer casing and cement), and it is open to corrosion by being exposed to the
atmosphere and hence oxygen and water.
Dealing with the latter point first, the geothermal gas H
2
S is heavier than air and
is likely to collect in the well cellar, where it will dissolve in rainwater. It attacks the
anchor casing at ground level, and to avoid this, venting of the cement annuli of the
outer casings at ground level is encouraged. The cement is removed for a few
centimetres depth and replaced by loose gravel (permeable), with perhaps a cover
and short vent pipe, and the heat of the well evaporates any water. Painting the
outside of the casing that is exposed to the atmosphere will help reduce corrosion
damage. The cellar usually has a large drain to a lower level, so that CO
2
and H
2
S
can flow away, being denser than air.
The anchor casing above ground is a simple pipe, and its wall thickness can be
selected using the Standard ANSI/ASME B31.1-1980 Power Piping, which gives a
formula for thickness:
t¼P:D=2σ
f
þ0:4PðÞ½(5.10)
where t is wall thickness, P is pressure, D is the outside diameter of the casing andσ
f
is the safe working stress (regarded as the failure criterion). To this minimum
thickness must be added a corrosion allowance; typical corrosion allowances in
steel piping and process equipment are 3 mm. An allowance for strength reduction
due to high operating temperature is also necessary, as given in the standard.
5.6  The Completed Wellhead95

A typical arrangement of valves on the wellhead is shown in Fig.5.5. Immedi-
ately above the casing head flange is a reducer (referred to as an expansion spool) to
allow 10
00
valves to be fitted. The production casing is cut off to allow this reducer
to be fitted, and a sufficient clearance must be left to ensure that the production
casing cannot apply a load to the anchor casing by expanding and making contact
with the interior of the reducer—Fig.5.1diagrammatically shows the production
casing cut short within the wellhead. The master valve is attached to the reducer and
then a T-section to allow 2 control valves. All of these wellhead valves are gate
valves, a type in which the flow passage is directly through the valve body, without
any restriction. To stop the flow, a plate is driven across the valve normal to the flow
direction. To control the flow, i.e. restrict the flow, the plate is partially closed.
This results in abrasion damage to the plate which results in it forming a “leaky”
Fig. 5.5A typical geothermal wellhead
965  Geothermal Drilling and Well Design

seal when closed, so the rule is that the master valve is either open or shut, and its
gate is never exposed to the flow, so as to preserve its sealing ability. Master valves
often have a more elaborate plate mechanism than other gate valves, to ensure a
perfect seal. Any flow control required is achieved with the valves above the master
valve or other means (see Sect.8.1.1). When opening the well, the control valves
are left closed until the master valve is fully opened, and the control valves are
closed first when discharge has to be stopped. The expansion spool carries two side
valves which are used for chemical sampling or similar duty.
References
American Petroleum Institute.http://www.api.org
API (1994) Bulletin 5C3 - Bulletin on formulas and calculations for casing, tubing, drill pipe, and
line pipe properties, 6th edn. American Petroleum Institute, Washington, DC
ASME.http://files.asme.org/MEMagazine/Web/20779.pdf
Bassam A, Santoyo E, Andaverde J, Hernandez JA, Espinoza-Ojeda OM (2010) Estimation of
static formation temperatures in geothermal wells by using an artificial neural network
approach. Comput Geosci 36(9):1191–1199
Bixley PF, Hattersly SD (1983) Long term casing performance of Wairakei production wells.
In: Proceedings of the 5th New Zealand geothermal workshop
Brennand AW (1984) A new method for the analysis of static formation temperature tests.
In: Proceeding of the 6th New Zealand geothermal workshop, University of Auckland,
Auckland
Dench ND (1970) Casing string design for geothermal wells. Geothermics. Special Issue 2, Part 2:
1485–96
Kurata Y, Sanada N, Nanjo H, Ikeuchi J (1995) Casing pipe materials for deep geothermal wells.
Geothermal Resources Council Trans 19:105–109
Leaver JD (1982) Failure mode analysis for casing and liners in geothermal production wells. In:
Proceedings of the 4th New Zealand geothermal workshop
Lejano DMZ, Colina RN, Yglopez DM, Andrino RP, Malate RCM, Sta-Anna FXM (2010) Casing
inspection caliper campaign in the Leyte geothermal field, Philippines. Stanford geothermal
workshop
Massei S, Bianchi C (1995) Failure control of drill string components: non-destructive inspection.
World geothermal congress
New Zealand Standard (1991) Code of practice for deep geothermal wells. NZS 2403:1991,
Standards Association of New Zealand
Southon JNA (2005) Geothermal well design, construction and failures. In: Proceeding of the
world geothermal conference
Stevens L (2000) Monitoring of casing integrity in geothermal wells. In: Proceeding of the world
geothermal conference
Takahashi W, Osato K, Takasugi S, White SP (1997) Estimation of the formation temperature
from the inlet and outlet mud temperatures while drilling. In: Proceedings of the 22nd
workshop on geothermal reservoir engineering, University of Stanford
Zarrouk SJ (2004) External casing corrosion in New Zealand’s geothermal fields. In: Proceedings
of the 26th New Zealand geothermal workshop
References97